 The seriousness of the situation prevailing on our continent, the longstanding nature of the problem and the observation of indicators for future prospects deserve to be met as a particularly complex challenge and should never be considered as a pretext for showing lassitude or indifference.
 The lack of progress in Africa would be a set-back for all, not just for the Africans.
 We are convinced that this fact will become increasingly clear to us.
 In the 1990s in particular, Africa undertook, in rather difficult conditions, reforms and economic adjustments as well as political and managerial transformations.
 The African achievement certainly has not yet reached its optimal goal, but it must be said that on many occasions it was not adequately supported by external measures and resources, which are, after all, indispensable complements.
 African regional cooperation must increase its pace and must obtain increased benefits.
 However, the continent must be the beneficiary of, inter alia, a major reduction in its debt burden, the elimination of obstacles to its exports, vigorous foreign investments and increasing international assistance better adapted to national policies.
 For Cape Verde, which is coordinating the activities of this Committee, it is particularly important that this event be crowned with success.
 My country cannot forget the role which the Organization played in its political emancipation and in its development efforts following that emancipation, nor do we forget that it offers a forum in which small countries can have their say and participate in the deliberations.
 Mr. Kamilov (Uzbekistan) (interpretation from Russian): Allow me to join preceding speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your election as President of the current session of the United Nations General Assembly.
 For me, it is a great honour to address the Assembly today from this lofty rostrum on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan.
 Just recently, Uzbekistan marked the third anniversary of the proclamation of its independence.
 The Parliament and the Government have adopted a number of significant and fundamental laws and decrees which are now opening the way to developing entrepreneurship and privatization.
 A number of legislative and economic incentives for potential foreign investors have been provided, and an extremely favourable environment has been created for their activities in the Republic's markets.
 For example, all limitations on the importation and exportation of foreign investments have been lifted.
 Customs duties for goods imported into Uzbekistan have also been cancelled.
 The most important process of introducing the national currency was recently completed in Uzbekistan.
 Implementation of the measures jointly agreed upon with the International Monetary Fund will make it possible to have a firm fiscal policy and will strengthen the national currency.
 Perhaps there is no country in the world that has sufficient experience to extend ready advice on how to change social and economic structures smoothly.
 The complicated and very often controversial processes of the transition to democracy and a market economy are being carried out mainly on an empirical basis, and sometimes in a highly contradictory situation.
 An extremely complicated task for the people of Uzbekistan is the perception of the basic principles of democracy and the socially oriented market economy, while at the same time preserving the development of its own rich history and unique culture and traditions.
 This is assuming today a decisive significance in the successful realization of the task of renewing our society and in the construction of an independent State.
 In fact, in many countries, social justice has already long been recognized as a fundamental principle of social life.
 In essence, if we look at the future in the long term, without justice there cannot be any kind of stability, peace or security.
 There cannot be any social development, any freedom for the individual, human dignity or an acceptable quality of life for all.
 The Constitution of Uzbekistan grants to all citizens of the Republic basic rights and freedoms and provides for their equality before the law without distinction as to sex, race, nationality, language, religion, social standing, or personal beliefs.
 We do believe, however, that universally accepted human rights concepts should be adapted to the national, religious and historical characteristics of different countries.
 Each nation is eager to establish its own political, social and cultural systems on the basis of respect for the national sovereignty of other States and the principle of non-interference in their internal affairs.
 I hope that the recent seminar of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) on general issues, held in Tashkent, the capital of Uzbekistan, provided an opportunity to the international observers and its participants to see the gradual evolution of our society towards democracy.
 At the same time, the seminar has deepened our knowledge on possible ways to make progress in the field of human rights.
 Unfortunately, the end of the confrontation between two social and political systems, which reached its peak in the military sphere, has not brought about universal peace.
 I should particularly like to emphasize that today this region is becoming a dangerous zone of open production of and trade in drugs and weapons.
 These conflicts are exacerbated by the fact that certain forces are secretly seeking to maintain tension in order to strengthen and expand their influence by making use of various religious and nationalist slogans.
 Moreover, there are some influential groups of drug and weapon dealers interested in continuing the military confrontation for the sake of the preservation of their illegal profits.
 In general, crises of this nature have revealed the inadequacy of the existing instruments to settle them through traditional means, given the new security demands of the post-cold-war era.
 In this context, Uzbekistan welcomes any initiative by individual countries or groups of countries, as well as by the United Nations, aimed at settling the conflicts.
 The new possibilities of the United Nations could expand the spectrum of military-political measures for stabilizing situations in such explosive regions, including within the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
 At the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly, President Karimov of Uzbekistan proposed the convening in Tashkent of a standing seminar on security issues under the auspices of the United Nations.
 About 15 States have already expressed their interest in participating in the seminar.
 We are ready to welcome its participants to the ancient and peaceful land of Uzbekistan.
 In fact, the only support Uzbekistan is rendering to this neighbouring country is humanitarian aid for its suffering people, as requested by the Government of Afghanistan, as well as to Tajik refugees who fled to Afghanistan.
 In general, narcotics come to Uzbekistan through neighbouring countries, where, owing to unstable political situations, control over the drugs business has been weakened.
 Moreover, most of these narcotics are in transit to European countries.
 An example of the successful cooperation between law-enforcement institutions is the Agreement signed in 1992 by the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Uzbekistan and its counterparts in Russia, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Belarus and Ukraine.
 Since October 1993 the Republic has been maintaining close cooperation with the United Nations International Drug Control Programme.
 The visit of the Deputy Executive Director of this United Nations Programme, Mr. Georgio Giacomelli, to Uzbekistan was an important event in the development of cooperation on this issue.
 A document defining a long-term programme of collaboration against narcotics was signed during the course of that visit.
 I should like especially to draw attention to the important role that regional representatives involved in the United Nations Programme have been playing in the coordination of international efforts to solve this global problem.
 This process was begun in Tashkent at the invitation of the President of Uzbekistan.
 I must not miss this opportunity to refer briefly to environmental issues.
 Central Asia, like many other regions of the world, has experienced ecological disasters of global dimensions.
 Over a period of several years the volume of water has dropped more than three times, the area has diminished two times; and the shoreline has receded 80 kilometres.
 The death of the Aral Sea, which is possible, could have unpredictable consequences for the whole world.
 One possible means of solving this global problem is the creation of an international commission of experts under the auspices of the United Nations, which would initiate projects and make recommendations.
 There are now about 200 States, and the roles of many countries have changed.
 Huge economic unions are being formed by States.
 Regional and global cooperation is an increasing trend.
 Because of the need for effective management of the processes of economic integration Governments are voluntarily transferring some of their sovereign rights to newly created joint political institutions.
 On the other hand, these trends underline the fact that a State should be recognized as a sovereign member of the world community so that such cooperation may be possible.
 The necessary reforms are already producing results.
 I refer in particular to the recent decision to establish the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
 As an Under-Secretary-General, the head of this Office will be able to initiate a more substantial discussion on the impending phases of reform of the Organization.
 It is obvious that this process will be difficult and time-consuming.
 Our country bases its foreign policy on the realities of the contemporary world. It aims for integration with the world community through equal partnership with all other countries.
 Of course, our current capabilities are limited, for a number of understandable reasons.
 We are eager to cooperate with countries that are interested, and we are prepared to do so both at the bilateral level and within the framework of the United Nations.
 Prince Saud Al-Faisal (Saudia Arabia) (interpretation from Arabic): It is with pleasure that I begin this speech by conveying to you, Sir, our most sincere congratulations on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Your election not only reflects the trust placed in you personally but also bespeaks the regard of the international community for your country, Ce d'Ivoire.
 We wish you success in the pursuit of your mission.
 The Government of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques has always been willing to play a positive role in the international arena, and to contribute to achieving our common goals of security, stability and prosperity.
 The principles and other foundations of our present international order derive their legitimacy and strength from the tenets of the United Nations Charter, which are inherent in international legality.
 Based on its adherence to Islamic shari'a, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is committed to the principles of the United Nations Charter, and has endeavoured throughout the Organization's history to implement those principles in practice.
 The Gulf Cooperation Council, whose current session my country has the honour of chairing, bases itself on the principles of the United Nations Charter.
 We are convinced that the international community's success in serving the cause of international peace and security will depend on the commitment by its members to the United Nations Charter and on the strength of their political will to apply the resolutions of international legality.
 We in the Gulf Cooperation Council recognize the prominent role played by the Secretary-General in fashioning a new approach for the United Nations based on the principles of the United Nations Charter and the norms of international legality.
 We welcomed the Secretary-General's proposals in his "An Agenda for Peace", and we look forward to his agenda for development.
 Success in achieving this aim will rely to a great extent on the degree of support by Member States for the principles and principles of the United Nations.
 The most important of these are: the maintenance of international peace and security; peacemaking through the deterrence of aggression; the elimination of threats to the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of nations; and the promotion of cooperation in the service of international development.
 Under the United Nations Charter, the Security Council, the body most directly concerned with the maintenance of international peace and security, has the primary responsibility for dealing with international problems.
 As we pursue reform of United Nations organs, it is therefore crucial that the Council be made more capable and better equipped to carry out its mandate under the Charter.
 That role clearly reflected the international community's expectations regarding the responsibilities of the United Nations.
 It also highlighted the ability of the Security Council to confront aggression and reverse its effects.
 We hope that this solidarity will help guarantee that no repetition of this aggression can occur.
 This can be achieved only through complete and total implementation of all Security Council resolutions on the matter.
 The Iraqi Government continues to defy international legality and to attempt to deceive international public opinion through limited implementation of some of the requirements of Security Council resolutions 661 (1990) and 687 (1991) pertaining to the issue of weapons of mass destruction.
 The true objective of these Iraqi efforts is to circumvent Security Council resolutions, which contain a number of requirements accepted by the Iraqi Government and which together form an interrelated legal structure.
 Furthermore, Iraq must comply with its commitment to release all Kuwaiti and non-Kuwaiti prisoners and detainees.
 While we welcome Iraq's participation on the committee dealing with prisoners and detainees, we hope that its participation is a genuine attempt to settle this humanitarian issue and not merely a symbolic move to appease international public opinion.
 It must refrain from committing or sponsoring any acts of terrorism or subversion.
 All of the above requirements represent a series of interrelated international legal obligations, that must be complied with in their entirety.
 The GCC States have actively participated in the Middle East peace process since its inception at the Madrid Peace Conference.
 The GCC States contributed to advancing the bilateral talks between the Arab States and Israel.
 They have also participated effectively in the multilateral talks.
 The Arab delegations' commitment to and participation in this process gave a clear indication of their sincere intention to work towards a just and comprehensive peace in the region.
 The multilateral talks are an integral part of the peace process launched in Madrid and complement the bilateral talks and not a substitute thereto.
 The signing of the Declaration of Principles between the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Israeli Government in Washington in 1993, raised hopeful expectations, since it represented the first step towards the achievement of a just and permanent settlement of the Palestinian problem.
 While we welcome the progress achieved on the Jordanian-Israeli track, we wish to voice our deep concern over the lack of clear progress in the Syrian and Lebanese tracks.
 The issue of the occupied Golan Heights is clear and governed by the principles of respect for international borders.
 The Lebanese-Israeli track is governed by United Nations Security Council resolution 425 (1978), which clearly calls for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli troops from the Lebanese territory.
 The question of Al-Quds Al-Shareef is at the heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict, and permanent peace cannot be achieved in the Middle East without a just settlement of this issue.
 The settlement must take into account the resolutions of international legality, and in particular United Nations Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which calls for Israeli withdrawal from all territories occupied in 1967, and United Nations Security Council resolution 252 (1968) regarding Al-Quds Al-Shareef.
 Israel is thus required to refrain from taking any measures that would demographically change the status of the city of Al-Quds or prejudice future negotiations pertaining to its final status.
 Any permanent and comprehensive settlement must also address the issue of the return of Palestinian refugees and the issue of settlements erected by Israel in the occupied territories in violation of international law and the Geneva conventions.
 Concrete progress on the various bilateral tracks on the various aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict is bound to lead inevitably to similar progress with regard to the issues addressed in the multilateral talks and lay the groundwork for a just, comprehensive, and lasting peace in the Middle East.
 We in the GCC are convinced that the success of the Palestinian National Authority in implementing the Declaration of Principles depends on the support it receives from the Palestinian people, as well as on the political and economic support it receives from the international community.
 It was on the basis of this conviction that the GCC States participated in the international donors conference held in Washington, D.C. in October of 1993 and pledged substantial financial assistance.
 The Gulf Cooperation Council States have also contributed financially to the establishment of a Palestinian police force and administration to enable it to assume its duties.
 We have also announced, along with our Arab brethren at the 102nd session of the League of Arab States, our full support for the Palestinian self-governing authority.
 In the context of their pursuit to help the Middle East region enjoy its legitimate share of security, peace and stability, the GCC States have focused great attention on efforts to rid the region of all weapons of mass destruction, whether nuclear, chemical or biological.
 To achieve this objective, we call on all countries in the region, including Israel, to refrain from producing, possessing or stockpiling any such weapons.
 The GCC States note with great concern the continued occupation of the three United Arab Emirates islands - Abu Moussa, the Greater and Lesser Tumbs - by the Islamic Republic of Iran.
 The GCC States, motivated by a desire to have the best possible ties with the Islamic Republic of Iran, have repeatedly urged the Islamic Republic of Iran to respond to the call of the United Arab Emirates to settle this problem by peaceful means through serious bilateral negotiations.
 The Serb forces have rejected the proposed peace plan and escalated their attacks against Bosnia and Herzegovina, which makes it patently clear that their intention is to undermine all the peaceful efforts undertaken by the United Nations.
 We listened with keen interest to the speech by President Alija Izetbegovic, which gave a graphic description of the dangerous situation in his country.
 In the light of this we are concerned that the hasty adoption by the United Nations Security Council of its resolution 943 (1994), which provides for relaxing the United Nations sanctions imposed on Serbia and Montenegro, could preclude a just settlement and lead to rewarding the aggression.
 Somalia continues to be in the grip of a situation of instability and political chaos coupled with acts of violence and bloodshed.
 In spite of all the efforts deployed to extricate this nation from its plight, instability and lack of security still plague this troubled land.
 The feelings of optimism and jubilation triggered by the victory of the Mujahideen in Afghanistan and the restoration of that country's independence and identity are now overshadowed by feelings of disappointment and bitterness as a result of the continued infighting between the various Mujahideen factions.
 These efforts were crowned when all factions were assembled in 1993 at the House of God in Makkah, and an agreement was signed to restore unity, security and stability to the nation of Afghanistan.
 The conflict over Jamu-Kashmir continues to cast its shadow over relations between the two neighbours, India and Pakistan, and represents one of the elements of instability in this part of the world.
 My Government continues to watch with concern the bloodshed there.
 Such a review of the hotbeds of tension and crises in our world must not cause us to lose sight of the important and positive developments which the world witnessed over the past decade and which should give us cause for hope in a better future for mankind.
 A general overview of international economic issues and the role played by the United Nations to strengthen international cooperation shows that the success of the Organization in dealing with economic issues and promoting international development, is also tied to the commitment of its Members to the United Nations Charter.
 The conclusion of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations is a commendable example of the international community's success in addressing a number of sensitive issues with unprecedented results.
 We are witnessing the emergence of the World Trade Organization, which we hope will embody our vision of an institutionalized global economic system.
 This development contradicts the premises of the Uruguay Round regarding the importance of allowing market forces to play their natural role in economic affairs in a manner which allows nations to benefit from comparative advantages and from the optimal utilization of resources.
 This can only be achieved through serious international efforts to ensure free trade.
 We also wish to state our concern over the increase in protectionism in the guise of protecting the environment, and in particular the increased taxation on petroleum.
 We are concerned that petroleum, which is our principal export commodity, is already heavily burdened by taxation, and yet it is now being targeted for further taxation while other, more polluting fuels are receiving subsidies from Governments.
 Coal is a case in point: according to studies published by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the International Energy Agency, coal subsidies in industrial States amount to more than twice the cost of comparable energy provided by imported petroleum.
 Furthermore, according to the same sources, tax reforms that take into consideration the carbon content of fuel could produce more than double the reduction in carbon dioxide emissions targeted by the proposed carbon taxes without further taxation on petroleum.
 This would adversely affect not only the economies of oil-exporting nations, but also those of oil-importing nations.
 We have not, and will not, hesitate to work towards strengthening the role of the United Nations and enhancing its effectiveness to ensure international peace and security and promote international cooperation.
 We hope with all sincerity that all other Member States will share this view when dealing with the various issues before the Assembly at this session.
 "And say work; and soon Allah will observe your work, and his messenger, and the believer".
 Mr. Ramirez Boettner (Paraguay) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish cordially to greet you, Mr. Amara Essy of Ce d'Ivoire, and to congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly.
 I pledge the fullest cooperation of the delegation of Paraguay.
 It is my pleasure also to hail the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and convey to him well-deserved congratulations on the excellent manner in which he has carried out his tasks.
 On behalf of the Government and the people of Paraguay, a founding Member of the United Nations, I pledge to him our full support for the Organization.
 It is our hope that he will visit our country as soon as he can; this would be further testament to our support for the United Nations and to our expectations as to what the United Nations can do to assist Paraguay in its current process of full democratization.
 That democratization has been under way in Paraguay since February 1989; it is now being consolidated under the Administration of Mr. Juan Carlos Wasmosy, President of the Republic.
 Today, the name of Paraguay does not appear in the dossiers of human rights violations.
 Not a single United Nations or other agency of the international community has failed to note the undeniable progress in our country in every area connected with dignifying the human person, and the efforts we have made in the social sector.
 In view of the magnitude of the task, we again stress that the burden cannot be borne by one people alone.
 For us to be competitive, conditions in the international system must change: markets must be more open; credit must be more readily available, and at lower interest rates; and technology must be more accessible.
 We therefore believe in global solidarity, especially of the developed nations.
 The people of the developing countries cannot be asked to make greater sacrifices than they are already making unless they see a similar trend towards the transformation of the international community.
 I should like briefly to refer to our economic recovery, which began in 1989 and has produced very favourable results, even during a period of transition and major structural changes.
 Paraguay has been pursuing a policy of free trade and floating exchange rates, coupled with total freedom of movement for financial services and capital.
 These incentives place our country among those offering the best and most attractive terms in Latin America.
 Education and training are a major priority of our Government, because it feels that accelerated development depends on well-trained people.
 In connection with this economic integration, we are pleased to confirm that Paraguay firmly and enthusiastically supports the negotiations on the entry into MERCOSUR of the fraternal Republics of Bolivia and Chile.
 Paraguay has suggested to its MERCOSUR partners the establishment of essential supranational machinery, such as the office of secretary-general and a court of justice.
 That would allow us to hold joint negotiations with the European Union, as has seemed feasible since its Council's Corfu meeting, and with the signatories of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
 The summit of American nations convened in Miami by President Clinton will be an event of great significance for relations in this hemisphere in our common search for ever greater understanding among countries of this continent on political, economic and trade matters.
 At the subregional level, only a few weeks ago we were able to set in motion the first of 20 turbines of the huge Yacyret hydroelectric dam, built jointly by Paraguay and Argentina.
 The Government of Paraguay has worked hard to develop ties with the outside world in order to break out of the isolation arising from its landlocked condition and, until 1989, its deliberate marginalization by an authoritarian Government.
 There is therefore no question but that Paraguay is now, and will remain, an ideal place for major foreign and domestic investment and for implementing a policy of industrialization, based on our abundant, low-cost energy.
 It must be remembered, however, that Paraguay suffers a structural limitation that would appear to limit its development potential: its lack of a seaboard.
 We wish to turn this handicap, which has had a very negative impact on Paraguay in the past, into an advantage.
 At the regional, Latin American level, I wish to refer first to Paraguay's involvement in the Fourth Ibero-American Summit of Heads of State and Government.
 I should like to stress that Paraguay regards this conference as an essential link in its ties with the European Union and as a major forum with great potential.
 Another important event this year, again at the regional level, was the Eighth Conference of Presidents and Heads of Government of the Rio Group, which ended a few weeks ago.
 Paraguay fully endorsed the Declaration of the Rio Group, particularly with regard to the situations in Haiti and Cuba and the problem of drug-trafficking.
 Paraguay actively participated in producing the declaration in regard to the fraternal Republic of Cuba, which expresses the strong hope that it will introduce significant political and economic reforms in accordance with the people's will, and stating that we respect the self-determination of peoples and the principle of non-intervention.
 Paraguay lent its fullest support to the Rio Group's decisions, including its declaration on lifting the embargo against Cuba.
 With regard to the new post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Paraguay wishes to state that his great efforts with regard to individual rights must be complemented by the promotion of social and collective human rights.
 In 1923 we contributed to international law for the Americas with the Gondra Treaty of conciliation and arbitration, which has become one of the pillars of Latin America's juridical system.
 Along these lines of thought and practice, Paraguay enthusiastically welcomes the recent progress in connection with the United Nations Decade of International Law.
 In this connection, Paraguay has signed and ratified the main agreements that constitute the legal structure created through the United Nations.
 Here I want once more publicly to express our deep thanks to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), whose timely and effective work we have seen at first hand.
 We hail the Secretary-General's recent decision to seek better coordination within the United Nations system on technical cooperation and to make the Administrator of UNDP fully responsible for coordination system wide, including with the regional commissions and all other programmes.
 From this decision the United Nations will gain in efficiency and in the impact of its world-wide activities.
 Yet, in a spirit of honour and fraternity, I wish to repeat what I said here in New York at the June 1994 session of the Economic and Social Council - namely, that:
 But we appreciate and wish to continue to count on UNDP's support.
 Paraguay looks forward with keen interest and commitment to the World Summit for Social Development, to be held at Copenhagen.
 We are preparing to participate in that conference and have high expectations about the positive results it can achieve.
 Paraguay is so enthusiastic about the conference because the three basic items on its agenda are very closely connected with today's social problems: social integration, particularly of the most marginalized and disadvantaged groups; relief and reduction of poverty; and an increase in productive employment.
 As the draft agenda points out, all of this must be in the context of a propitious economic environment - and, we would add, with international cooperation.
 Here, Paraguay cannot fail to note that a characteristic of our times is economic growth without job-creation, a situation that must be corrected, since one of today's problems is indeed unemployment.
 Paraguay earnestly supports ongoing efforts, will support future efforts, developed by the United Nations in all areas of disarmament: nuclear, chemical and others.
 The Assembly should know that in the area of social development Paraguay has established a special commission to prepare for the Fourth World Conference on Women, to be held at Beijing.
 The commission brings together State and private bodies, which are drafting a final report on the situation of women in Paraguay.
 Paraguay confidently looks forward to the follow-up to GATT and to the work of its complementary successor body, the World Trade Organization.
 Paraguay fully shares in the entire international community's anguish at drug trafficking, and at the evil effects of that phenomenon.
 Notwithstanding our meagre resources, we are doing whatever is necessary to root it out wherever it is hiding, and to fight it head on.
 But, with the strength derived from reason, Paraguay affirms that the consumer countries, transit countries and producer countries alike must undertake an equal commitment to adopting vigorous measures.
 Unilateral efforts, however vigorous, to combat drug production and trafficking can never be successful without gradual shrinkage of the markets that give rise to production and trafficking in the first place.
 Linked with this universal scourge, which we condemn with all our strength and conviction, is the phenomenon of corruption, a human failing that is seen in varying degrees in all four corners of the Earth.
 Corruption spreads its tentacles as a reflection of a civilization that is prodigious in economic, financial, scientific, technical and industrial terms but is, we must admit, often found wanting in the firm ethical underpinnings and the genuine human values that strengthen and give vitality to a culture.
 Paraguay is following with great attention all United Nations efforts with respect to agenda item 142, "Measures to eliminate international terrorism".
 "because of its legal tradition and its contribution to the cause of peace, the Latin American and Caribbean region must be considered in any expansion of the Security Council".
 Paraguay also firmly supports parallel efforts to revitalize the functioning of the General Assembly.
 I want to mention and to highlight our great satisfaction at the obvious, sustained advance of democracy in Latin America, and at the consolidation of the various processes that are under way.
 We should like to reaffirm that the United Nations must continue to apply the principle of universality, making room within its ranks for all peace-loving States that meet the requirements as set forth in the Charter and that are prepared to honour its principles and purposes.
 We believe that the entry of the Republic of China as an independent country should be considered, along with the case of any other State that meets the conditions I have just mentioned.
 The President of our Republic will make the voice of my homeland heard on that most welcome occasion.
 Meanwhile, my country has established an ad hoc commission on the commemoration of that major event.
 We are now facing a major environmental problem since that international river springs from the mountains and is now growing shallower in its course because of sedimentation build-up.
 Moreover, the Pilcomayo, owing to works undertaken on Argentine territory, has had some 70 per cent of its volume absorbed in the territory of our neighbour.
 Paraguay hopes that matters will return to normal, that is, that the course of the Pilcomayo River will resume its balance, irrigating both border areas in an equitable way.
 As Paraguay is a land-locked country, it has an especially keen interest in the Convention on the Law of the Sea, which our country ratified as early as 1986.
 Paraguay has not forgotten the sister nations in Africa, which are striving to overcome immense difficulties in their quest for sustainable development and which deserve wide international support.
 Paraguay is similarly disposed towards the sister Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with which we enjoy fraternal ties. We wish its people peace and brotherhood, and will strive to commit the United Nations towards that end.
 We are very pleased to congratulate the State of Israel, the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Kingdom of Jordan on their having strengthened the foundations of fraternal and constructive coexistence in the region, initiated in the agreements between Israel and Egypt.
 Paraguay joined in the Conference Declaration and Programme of Action, while clearly and explicitly placing on record its demand for the defence of life and agreeing, in broad terms, with consensual and voluntary family planning.
 For that reason, Paraguay lodged two reservations similar to those expressed by other countries that share our view.
 As I bring my statement to a close, allow me to voice a personal reflection that arises from my many years in international life.
 I have been active in diplomacy since 1936.
 Apart from some time spent in academia, I have served my country or the United Nations.
 My generation was indeed moved when the United Nations Charter was signed.
 We were filled with hope, and the world seemed to be on the right path in reordering its affairs.
 We have travelled a long way since then, but we remain all the more convinced of the crucial need for this world Organization.
 I have worked closely with a number of them and shared their problems, their fears and their concerns as we struggled for a more just world.
 Indeed, we are not merely representatives of sovereign States or members of a world Organization. We are protagonists and agents who share the same planet, which is in many respects both very similar and very different.
 We have to show greater solidarity and regain our universal vision.
 As human beings, we all have an interest in whatever makes us more human, in all senses of the term.
 The vital force that springs from this vision helps us in our mission of saving our common home, the Earth.
 Mankind and the Earth: therein lies the key motivation for our commitment and for our endeavours, beneath the majestic gaze of the Creator.
 Mr. Ou\x{5dae}raogo (Burkina Faso) (interpretation from French): The honour and the duty of presiding over the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly have been entrusted to you, Mr. President, and, through you, to your country, Ce d'Ivoire.
 Burkina Faso and all of Africa are moved by this signal honour.
 Beyond the legitimate pride experienced by my delegation, I should like to reaffirm our full readiness to assist you.
 Your wealth of diplomatic experience, together with your professional and human qualities, will ensure the success of our deliberations.
 You have succeeded Ambassador Samuel Insanally of Guyana, who, with discretion and professionalism, determination and logical organization, guided a forty-eighth session that was rich in ideas, initiatives and various kinds of fruitful contacts.
 We thank him for this.
 Indeed, vision, courage and patience are virtues of which our world is in dire need.
 However, we have been witnessing a disintegration of the old order.
 From Bosnia and Herzegovina to Rwanda, the causes and means may differ more or less noticeably, but the immediate consequence is always identical: the enormous suffering of peoples.
 With regard to Angola, Burkina Faso welcomes the present efforts aimed at implementing the Peace Agreements and supports Security Council resolutions 864 (1993) and 932 (1994).
 As to Mozambique, it is our hope that the holding of free and democratic elections this month will put an end to so many years of confrontation and will further commit this brotherly country to a course of reconstruction and national reconciliation for development and peace.
 We hope that a solution can be found in Western Sahara within the framework of a referendum whose terms of reference will be accepted by all.
 Burkina Faso continues to support the Cotonou Agreement of 25 July 1993 as well as the Akossombo agreement of 12 September last.
 In Somalia, far from the cameras and the media, the tragedy that was so widely reported by those media two years ago continues.
 The same players are pursuing the same conflict just as chaotically and relentlessly, without any sign of the will to put an end to it through dialogue and negotiation.
 In Rwanda, the unspeakable tragedy that has combined genocide with intransigence has showed the international community its limits and the procrastination of which it has been guilty.
 We should like here to thank those who have wished to confine the irreparable and immeasurable damage within the limits of the restored human conscience.
 Without an active policy of reconciliation and national reconstruction, it is difficult to envisage a calm and stable future for that brotherly country.
 In this task, which is enormous in all respects, the Government of Rwanda will need all the assistance that can possibly be given it in a clear-sighted, responsible and committed manner.
 For its part, Burkina Faso, insofar as it is able, will tirelessly continue to make its contribution to Rwanda.
 Annoyance, irritation and understandable fatigue now hold sway in the Security Council in its consideration of the questions of Liberia and Somalia; indeed, it is even thinking about leaving those two brotherly countries to their own devices.
 Burkina Faso is aware of this and experiences it every day as President Blaise Compaor, putting these convictions into practice, engages in subregional mediation and thus makes his contribution to the great African plan for the necessary and indispensable integration of our continent.
 Peace thus must be unremittingly pursued.
 And the task of diplomats is to work to find acceptable and viable terms.
 In Asia and Latin America, the conflict situations with which our Organization is dealing are moving in a direction which gives us reasonable hope to see a settlement very soon.
 We encourage Kuwait and Iraq to respect resolution 833 (1993) of the Security Council.
 Burkina Faso has welcomed and hailed the signing on 13 September 1993 of the historic agreement on the Declaration of Principles between President Arafat and Prime Minister Rabin, and also the signature on 4 May 1994 of the Agreement on Gaza and Jericho.
 The South African people now have leaders that they have freely elected.
 Here among us at last in the United Nations, South Africa will be able to play and fully shoulder its role in the community of nations, thus strengthening that principle of universality that we supported in a recent initiative concerning the Republic of China.
 All of this indicates the extent to which political upheavals affect, sometimes in an extraordinary fashion, the lives of men, women and children on all continents.
 However, to use an expression that was used four years ago during the World Summit for Children, the world continues inexorably to witness a "silent emergency" that is still going on and is growing.
 The global economy has experienced a recession that has more brutally and heartlessly affected the developing countries.
 This state of affairs has exacerbated situations of injustice and flagrant inequality.
 This is not new, and it will be reiterated as long as the developing countries do not have a greater say concerning the processes and machinery for decision-making relating to all these questions.
 This agenda should put forward specific measures for implementation focused on growth and development, and integrate the strategies and plans for action negotiated and adopted during the United Nations conferences.
 From Rio to Cairo, it has been possible to obtain consensus, but what is still missing are the new and additional resources with which to implement the decisions taken.
 In this connection, we hope that the implementation of the International Convention to Combat Desertification, signed in Paris on 14 and 15 October 1994, will not also suffer from this lack.
 While the developing countries are fulfilling their share of commitments, the developed countries are balking at making their contributions.
 This is notably affecting the concept and the implementation of global partnership, which was so highly praised at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.
 We fear that, as regards the use made of their results, these Conferences have only been understood in terms of their theme, without taking account of development.
 The commitment undertaken by the developed countries to allocate 0.7 per cent of their GNP to public assistance for development has not always been respected, except by a few of them.
 Africa, more than the other continents, is in a situation that is critical and recognized as such by the United Nations.
 Over the last ten years, the African debt has been discussed ad infinitum, without, however, being reduced or eliminated to an extent likely to allow Africa to relaunch its economy and structure its markets.
 Several of our partners have made efforts, and we note the decision of the Group of Seven in Naples to expand the Trinidad Conditions to the performing African countries.
 If this is a step in the right direction, it is not sufficient in a context where, as I said earlier, the deterioration of the terms of trade and the loss of preferential markets are increasing the burden of the debt.
 We therefore support the efforts of the Secretary-General aimed at establishing a fund for diversification, and we call upon the partners of Africa to play an active and positive role in establishing this fund.
 In April 1994, the signing in Marrakesh of the Agreements of the Uruguay Round opened a new chapter in international trade relations, more or less establishing the marginalization of Africa, which had already been evident throughout the negotiations.
 On the basis of a concern for independence and for the integration of the global economy, access to resources, markets and technology, preferential assistance and compensation measures must be open to the developing countries.
 The spirit of this new configuration should not be motivated by charity but rather by the awareness that certain measures must be taken to ensure that the development of the world in partnership and solidarity takes place harmoniously.
 The forthcoming World Summit for Social Development, therefore, should emphasize man's needs and put man at the centre of development and of international cooperation in drawing up the objectives and specific commitments which we shall be undertaking.
 So too, the World Conference on Women to be held in Beijing will have to continue that work of intensification begun in Cairo during the International Conference on Population and Development: woman, the best agent for development.
 For half a decade, the Member States of the United Nations have been involved in a series of Conferences that culminated in an acknowledgment of the following facts.
 It is part of human rights.
 One after the other, the representatives who have spoken have emphasized the role of the United Nations.
 The Organization is the most valuable multilateral instrument available to nations.
 It is important that we give it the means to fulfil our ambitions and our projects.
 We salute and thank the 73 nations that are offering their sons and their resources for the purpose of extinguishing flames kindled throughout the world by man's intransigence and madness.
 Apart from the question of urgency, there are priorities.
 If these are understood and dealt with, the emergency situations of tomorrow and beyond will be eased, and we shall come closer to having a more stable, less unjust and more harmonious world.
 The profusion, complexity and simultaneousness of problems relentlessly assail societies and nature.
 Mankind will be able to face these challenges and difficulties only by assuming and accepting our complementarity and our interdependence.
 It is that initiative and that momentum which will renew our bond with the ideals proclaimed 49 years ago in a document signed in San Francisco, which we call the Charter of the United Nations.
 Let us, therefore, be an Organization of truly united nations.
 This is possible only if there is a spirit of justice, peace and solidarity.
 I am convinced that your wisdom and your qualities as an experienced and competent diplomat will ensure the success of our work.
 My delegation assures you of its full support.
 I want also to pay well-deserved tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for the tireless efforts he has made and the determination he has shown since his election to achieve the noble objectives assigned to the United Nations.
 His devotion to peace and the promotion of international cooperation at a time marked by many complex changes guarantees the Organization's victory over the challenges facing humanity.
 Mr. Eltinay (Sudan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 My Government welcomes South Africa's long-awaited return to this Organization following the dismantling of apartheid and the holding of the first multiracial, pluralist elections.
 The forty-ninth session is being held at a time that is very favourable for the strengthening of international relations, thanks to more constructive dialogue.
 However, a quick look at the international scene shows that we are still far from the ideal of peace.
 Here and there warlords are stirring up tension, bringing tragedy to innocent victims - in particular, the elderly, women and children.
 In Liberia, Rwanda, Somalia, Bosnia, Afghanistan and Angola - to refer to just some countries - killing, rape and destruction are going on.
 We are all concerned, yet we all seem to be powerless.
 It is regrettable that most of this tragedy is being played out in Africa, a continent already sorely tried by economic crises, natural disasters and forced migration.
 My delegation believes that the international community as a whole, and this Organization in particular, should act with greater firmness and unity to put an end to this tragic situation.
 For five years now, fratricidal conflicts have plunged Liberia into chaos and desolation.
 This conflict's damaging consequences for neighbouring States have become unbearable.
 Other regions of the world too are experiencing the same difficulties that threaten international peace and security.
 Once again, only a proper political approach, taking account of the specific values of the parties concerned and of the political and material needs of the populations, will produce the conditions for lasting peace.
 I welcome the positive developments in the Middle East, exemplified by the peace agreement signed in Washington between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization and also that signed between Israel and Jordan.
 These agreements constitute in many respects important milestones in the recognition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, and they offer hope for a lasting and comprehensive peace in that region.
 The remarkable progress made through the bilateral and multilateral negotiations in the field of disarmament and arms control clearly underscores the determination of Member States to shield our planet from the spectre of destruction.
 However, many perils still hamper our efforts to bring about collective security, which would encompass the related problems of development, environment and human rights.
 In certain sensitive regions, the trade in conventional weapons and their frequent use in conflicts, along with the trade in nuclear materials and the desire of some countries to possess nuclear weapons, add to our Organization's responsibilities and call for stringent verification measures.
 In this brief overview of some of the major issues in the world, I wish to stress the importance of peace-keeping operations.
 I consider it useful to rethink the problems of such operations, whose motives and procedures for implementation seem very often to involve double standards.
 We believe that in order to give them the desired legitimacy and effectiveness these operations should be the subject of coordination and dialogue in which all United Nations Member States take part, for collective security is the business of all nations of the world, be they large or small.
 Africa's keen interest in the quest for ways and means to guarantee peace, security and stability on our continent is reflected in the mechanism for the prevention, settlement and management of conflicts established by the Organization of African Unity.
 This instrument is already functioning; it deals with all forms of crisis that might jeopardize African peoples' efforts at economic, social and cultural development.
 A peace fund has been set up to give financial support to the actions undertaken by this mechanism.
 While appreciating the efforts of the United Nations in the economic and social fields, we note with regret the absence of any significant results in the implementation of the measures adopted.
 Today we are concerned to see that inequalities in international trade are worsening and that debt-servicing, which is a burden on the meagre resources obtained from structural adjustment, require bold action.
 Furthermore, the debt burden neutralizes the mobilization of funding for commodity exports, which are constantly depreciating because of inequitable terms of trade.
 In my delegation's view, there can be no development if there is not an increase in income from commodities, whose prices, unfortunately, are not controlled by the developing countries.
 The quest for prosperity could be a danger, since it engenders a strong migratory flow from the South to the North.
 Despite the socio-economic changes carried out in our States to stimulate private initiative and cooperative movements and to improve living conditions, the African continent is still experiencing an unprecedented economic crisis.
 To this precarious picture we must add the resurgence of social problems, such as juvenile delinquency, illicit trade in drugs and narcotics, unemployment, the AIDS pandemic and the deleterious effects of persistent drought and other natural disasters.
 In this context, we support the recommendations and decisions of the international Conference held in Tokyo on African development.
 Furthermore, my delegation urges the international community to increase official development assistance and requests the United Nations to give greater support to the laudable efforts of the African countries in their economic-recovery policies, in keeping with Article 55 of the Charter.
 As long as some are afraid of the progress of others, the myth of Sisyphus will prevail and part of our globe will be for ever harnessed to the yoke.
 Only dialogue, tolerance and the elimination of poverty throughout the world will guarantee lasting peace and strengthen the unity and stability of nations.
 In this regard we should stress the relevance of the Secretary-General's Agenda for Development.
 Highlighting the many aspects of development and its connection with peace, the environment, international security and human rights, it is a reference document in our quest for solutions to the many economic difficulties facing the developing countries.
 It has thus enriched our discussion on sustainable development.
 In my country, the Republic of Guinea, we have undertaken an ambitious programme of political, economic, cultural and social restructuring.
 The process of establishing democratic and liberal institutions will be totally completed during the last quarter of this year with the holding of legislative elections.
 In order to pay the price of political and socio-economic liberalization, we need, in addition to substantial financial assistance, considerable support and understanding from the entire international community.
 This important event will offer an opportunity for us all to recall the very special circumstances that gave birth to our Organization and to pay a well-deserved tribute to the work of the founding fathers.
 My country is making great efforts to prepare for this great event, and to this end a national organizational committee has been established.
 Nevertheless, in order to become more effective, it needs to be restructured and revitalized.
 This applies to the Security Council and the other main bodies.
 That is what is needed for the United Nations to succeed in its mission of maintaining international peace and security and promoting a balanced world economy.
 Mr. Lengsavad (Lao People's Democratic Republic) (spoke in Lao; interpretation from French text furnished by the delegation): First, I am very pleased to convey to the President my warmest congratulations on his election to preside over the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
 His wide experience and knowledge of international affairs, his well-known wisdom and patience are guarantees of success in the many difficult tasks of this session.
 I should also like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretary-General of our Organization, for the praiseworthy efforts he has made in the service of world peace and development.
 Aware how heavy is his burden in this complex, fast-changing time, we wish him every possible success in the discharge of his lofty duties.
 While the end of the bipolar era opened the door to dialogue and cooperation between States, it did not usher in an era of peace, which the world so badly needs if it is to construct a sound world economy.
 In some regions of Europe, Africa and Asia, religious, ethnic, tribal and border conflicts, often of tragic proportions, are still raging, thus making the international situation unstable and fragile.
 It therefore seems clear that it will be difficult to achieve a new world order in which true peace prevails and in which peoples and nations, large and small, powerful and weak, rich and poor, benefit.
 The international community should give more thought to this matter and join together to build a new era of peace and justice, to which the peoples of the world have so long aspired.
 In Europe, the situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina is still tense.
 The risk of new military clashes between the various parties remains.
 In a spirit of national reconciliation, the parties concerned have managed to reach an understanding and to cooperate in the building of a united, non-racial and democratic South Africa.
 Still in Africa, in Rwanda, we have seen unprecedented bloodshed.
 The Government and people of Laos strongly condemn the abominable carnage, which has been described as genocide of an innocent population, and we call upon the parties to the conflict to take the necessary steps to prevent such unacceptable crimes from ever happening again.
 The world is following closely the disturbing humanitarian situation in the Caribbean.
 In our view, there should be a political solution to this complex situation, through sincere dialogue between the parties directly concerned.
 That agreement, the fruit of long and difficult negotiations between the two parties, constitutes an important first step in the settlement of their differences, which should contribute to strengthening peace, stability and cooperation in the region.
 In Haiti, due to the animosities still keenly felt by the partisans of the military regime and President Aristide's sympathizers, the political situation continues to be fragile and complex.
 We believe that, in the best interests of the Haitian nation, it is time for the parties to show great wisdom and begin the economic reconstruction of their beloved land.
 We welcome this new, crucial step, and hope that the parties to the conflict will do everything possible to achieve a comprehensive settlement, just and honourable for all, within the framework of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and other relevant United Nations resolutions.
 In Western Asia, despite countless efforts exerted towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict, Afghanistan remains the theatre of a bloody civil war.
 In the Korean peninsula, after months of uncertainty, dialogue between the parties concerned has finally resumed.
 We warmly encourage that dialogue and the Lao delegation welcomes the conclusion of the Agreement signed in Geneva on 12 August 1994 between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the United States of America.
 Because of its importance everything should be done to ensure that this sensitive region of the world becomes a nuclear-weapon-free zone.
 In the interests of peace, stability and cooperation in that region as well as in the world, it is essential that all the parties concerned show understanding and mutual trust in order to find a peaceful solution to the issues between them.
 In South-East Asia a new era of cooperation in areas of common interest between countries of the region has grown ever stronger.
 In addition, the Heads of State or Government of our respective countries have regularly been exchanging visits with a view to expanding and deepening their friendship and cooperation in an extensive and fruitful field of cooperation.
 In Myanmar a new, important event has taken place.
 Efforts towards national reconciliation and the start of economic cooperation with the outside world have been bearing their initial fruits, thus consolidating the stability of the country.
 In the Lao People's Democratic Republic we note, fortunately, that on the whole our economic performance has been good.
 At the present time the Lao Government is exerting major efforts to achieve the goals set in its socio-economic development strategy from now to the year 2000.
 That strategy presented to the fifth round-table meeting organized expressly for the Lao People's Democratic Republic in Geneva last June, under the sponsorship of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), was conceived as a realistic and trustworthy document and has received broad support from participants.
 The world economy, far from improving, still faces an uncertain future.
 Marked by recession and imbalances, it also suffers from grave structural problems.
 Because of the world economy's interdependence it is important that developed countries undertake to cooperate with the developing countries in order to restore the economy and to promote development in the interests of all.
 The question relating to drug abuse and illicit trafficking remains an issue of world concern.
 As part of these efforts and with the assistance of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNIDCP) this year we have developed a comprehensive programme for drug control.
 That programme, the cost of which is $35 million, consists of setting up 16 projects, including the strengthening of drug control administration, reduction of supply through eradication of the poppy crop, a strategy for treatment and rehabilitation, and the establishment of a special investigation unit.
 With assistance and cooperation from the international community we hope to be able to achieve the goal we pursue.
 The world exists in an uncertain international political environment.
 In that context the United Nations, the only universal multilateral forum, should have a crucial role to play.
 Strengthened by the purposes and principles of its Charter, it is in a position to provide the necessary framework for cooperation, dialogue among States and the maintenance of international peace and security.
 In order to carry out its noble task effectively in this new era, the United Nations must restructure and democratize itself.
 It is also most important that the United Nations give top priority to a programme of action on development that could serve as a framework for promoting growth and economic development throughout the world.
 We feel that, to be effective, any programme of action on development must be action-oriented and based on a spirit of true international cooperation and interdependence; above all, it must take into account the basic legitimate interests of developing countries, especially the least developed among them.
 Mr. Serreqi (Albania): Allow me at the outset to congratulate Mr. Essy on his election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session and to wish him every success in discharging this noble duty.
 A well-deserved word of appreciation is due to his predecessor, Ambassador Insanally, for the remarkable competence and skill he displayed as President at the last session.
 We highly esteem the Secretary-General's unreserved commitment, at the head of the world Organization, to make broad reforms in it and to increase its effectiveness in all fields.
 After the fall of the iron curtain in Europe, Albania joined the family of democratic nations, leaving behind a deep isolation and a totalitarian regime.
 In two years, thanks to the determination of the democratic Government to carry out profound and urgent reforms, Albania has taken important steps in all fields.
 State institutions have been transformed, drawing upon the positive experience of developed States.
 Currently in Albania, there are more than 30 registered political parties, hundreds of non-governmental organizations, and more than 320 magazines and newspapers, of which 90 per cent are privately owned.
 At present, Albania's religious communities practise their own beliefs in exemplary harmony and tolerance, according to the centuries-old traditions of my country.
 However, Albania continues to be the poorest country of the European continent and faces a series of economic difficulties.
 By firmly pursuing the economic policy of shock therapy, in cooperation with the International Monetary Fund and the international community, the Government is implementing a series of short- and medium-term programmes that have given a great impetus to free individual initiative.
 From 400 per cent, the inflation rate has dropped to less than 30 per cent a year; the currency is stable and practically convertible; and production is on the rise.
 In 1993, Albania recorded growth rate of 11 per cent, the highest in Europe.
 Foreign investments are also increasing.
 In the coming months we shall move ahead without losing time. The nearest objectives in legislation are the approval of the new penal code, the penal procedure code and the constitution, which will meet most advanced European standards.
 We will also try to increase cooperation with various international organizations, particularly with the agencies of the United Nations system.
 We want to have friendly relations, especially with our neighbours, and we are making efforts so that a climate of good understanding and cooperation, based on mutual respect and benefit in the spirit of the basic principles of the Helsinki Final Act, will prevail all around us.
 We have established such relations with Italy and are on the way to their further and all-round development.
 We regard these relations, not merely as bilateral, but also as closely linked to the prospect of the integration of Albania and the Balkans into Europe.
 Advances are being made in the relations of good-neighbourliness and broad cooperation with Turkey, Bulgaria and Romania, on the basis of a long historical tradition.
 As regards the new Balkan State, our eastern neighbour, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, we are resolutely committed to building relations of exemplary neighbourliness with it and to helping that country overcome its internal and external difficulties.
 We are convinced that its integrity, its internal stability, its recognition and its membership in all international forums are of vital importance for peace, security and stability in the region.
 Our indispensable good relations with Macedonia are linked to and conditioned by the presence of an Albanian population that ranks second in size to Macedonians.
 We think that sound interethnic understanding between Macedonians and Albanians, established on the basis of the due recognition of the Albanians' human and national rights, is indispensable for the domestic stability and prosperity of that Republic and the entire region.
 We would like to have peace, good-neighbourliness and fruitful cooperation with Montenegro and Serbia, but these relations will remain frozen and mortgaged to the overall solution of the Yugoslav crisis, especially the political settlement of the Kosovo issue.
 The question concerns recognition of the political self-governing entity of the Albanians, for which the population of Kosovo has cast its vote in a democratic manner.
 Belgrade should seriously consider this option.
 For the further promotion of Albania's democratic and economic changes there is a need for security and confidence in the Balkans.
 National and ethnic problems left over from the past, backwardness in terms of economic and social development, and the new problems resulting from the change of systems make it still possible for old political mentalities to dominate the stage of inter-Balkan relations.
 As a Balkan country, Albania is concerned about the war and the crises that have encompassed our peninsula.
 We are convinced that at the foundation of the present-day Balkan crisis lies the revival of aggressive nationalism, which has unfurled the banner of territorial annexationist claims.
 In today's Balkans the nations that consider themselves more powerful and better armed are seeking to extend their territories through force and war in order to expand their power.
 At the foundation of what politicians today call "ethnic conflicts" in the Balkans lie the aggressive nationalism of a hegemony-seeking nation, racism and xenophobia, genocide and massive "ethnic cleansing".
 That is why we have often insisted that any settlement that would legalize the accomplished fact of "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia would create a dangerous precedent for new tragedies of this kind, starting in the Balkan region.
 Today, Serb and Greek nationalism are seriously threatening the Balkans.
 Such elements consider that the collapse of Communist dictatorships in the Balkans created a vacuum to be exploited to achieve their nationalist ambitions.
 Hence, Serb nationalism launched an aggression in the north and a war to realize a Greater Serbia by creating a real holocaust at the end of this century against the Bosnian people and by strengthening apartheid in Kosovo.
 In our judgement, only the intransigence of the international community and the refusal to recognize the violation of the principles that all of us have accepted will compel the Serbs in Belgrade, Pale and Knin to give up war as a means of solving problems.
 However, we are opposed to resolution 943 (1994), which is a concession to the Milosevic regime and makes a settlement of the Yugoslav crisis and the establishment of general peace in the Balkans remote.
 I would like to recall that the crisis in the former Yugoslavia started in Kosovo and that it persists there, alive and very dangerous.
 The Albanian Government insists that the lifting of sanctions against Serbia be conditioned on the settlement of the Kosovo issue.
 It was not Milosevic's goodwill but the unanimous stand of the great Powers of the Contact Group that recently made Belgrade announce an interruption of its aid to Serbian aggression in Bosnia and accept international monitoring of that act.
 They should be irreversible steps, for we consider that the future of peace and stability in the Balkans will also depend, to a considerable extent, on a just settlement of the Kosovo issue.
 Albanians in Kosovo have been deprived of all rights.
 Serb nationalism rejects dialogue.
 It is brandishing weapons and engaging in threats by the use of tanks; it is organizing police terror daily from village to village, from one city quarter to another.
 This is the only way, in our view, to reach an overall settlement of the Balkan crisis, which may grow into conflicts far larger than previous ones unless it is tackled with proper determination and responsibility.
 It is seeking, through a series of manoeuvres, to block the reforms in Albania and to destabilize it in an attempt to render the settlement of the Albanian question more difficult and delay it.
 To facilitate the position of its ally in the north, it is making territorial claims against Albania.
 The truth is that Greece today, as a member of NATO and the European Union, is subject to a certain control by and dependence on those organizations, and this is a positive thing.
 However, it is also true that over the past two years Greek nationalism has blocked action by those institutions several times because of the consensus needed to take decisions.
 Today, the establishment and progressive consolidation of positions in Greek official circles is a bitter fact.
 The power game that is taking place in Greece is undoubtedly being played through the free vote, but, in distinction to all the other countries of Western Europe, it is being played with nationalist slogans.
 It is an undeniable fact that after the game is played official Greece will emerge more nationalistic than it was before.
 It is precisely for these reasons that Greece, the birthplace of democracy, our millenary neighbour, avoided and gave up the opportunity to serve as a promoter of the integration of the Balkan countries into Europe after the fall of the iron curtain.
 At the same time, through its official and unofficial policy it became a true champion of Serb nationalism - not, of course, for the sake of Serbia's interests but for the sake of interests and ambitions which it hopes to achieve by remaking the Balkans.
 We do not mean that Greece can be compared to Serbia, for that would not be realistic.
 It is Greek state nationalism that blocks European Union aid to the poorest European country, Albania, rendering its economic growth more difficult.
 The official character the Greek Government has given to its policy on "northern Epirus" poses a serious threat to the Balkans.
 Greek nationalism is trying to manipulate about 60,000 Greeks who live in the south of Albania - according to the 1989 census, they comprise 1.85 per cent of the country's population - as a means to destabilize Albania and to achieve its annexationist designs.
 For this purpose, Greece is emitting organized, nationalistic and fundamentalist propaganda through radio stations, air-dropped leaflets and the distribution of materials which claim the south of Albania and demand the overthrow of the democratic Tirana Government.
 The Greek minority expressed this stand openly two weeks ago during Albanian President Sali Berisha's visit to Greek minority villages in the south of Albania.
 All this has arisen because ethnic minorities in Albania live in harmony with Albanians, and are not maltreated by the Government.
 On the contrary, with the establishment of the democratic regime, they are step by step enjoying the most advanced standards as set forth in United Nations instruments, the Copenhagen Document and other international conventions on minorities.
 This has been confirmed by dozens of foreign observers, ethnic minority specialists, parliamentarians, representatives of international institutions, including the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) High Commissioner for ethnic minorities, Mr. Max van der Stoel, various non-governmental organizations, journalists and so on.
 It cannot shirk its responsibility with its senseless denial of the presence of national minorities in Greece.
 How could the Turkish, Macedonian and Albanian minorities vanish in Greece at a stroke? The Greek Government should put an end to the suffocating climate that prevents these minorities from asserting their own national identity.
 How could the Greek Government forget the 1944-1945 massacre of the Albanian population of Chameria, when thousands upon thousands of people were stabbed to death and killed with firearms by Greek chauvinistic nationalists.
 And some of those who could escape alive, old folk and children, were expelled to Albania and Turkey, thus creating a real tragedy of divided families, whereas their land, homes and other property were usurped by Greek colonists, who still possess them today in contravention of international civil law.
 We have always appreciated the importance of good relations with Greece, free from any concern and tension, for our development, peace and security.
 Because of the reasons already mentioned, this has not always worked out.
 We tried to overcome the present-day crisis in our relations, provoked against our interest and will, through dialogue either on a bilateral footing or through international mediation.
 The Greek minority people in Albania, too, have publicly supported unconditional dialogue between the two Governments.
 The crisis the world is currently experiencing urgently raises the need to achieve consensus on such a restructuring of the Security Council, so as to make this important decision-making body as representative and democratic as possible and even more effective in the adoption of decisions and their implementation.
 We look confidently to the further enhancement of United Nations peace-keeping activities.
 We would like to stress the conclusion we have drawn from Bosnia's tragic experience.
 We seriously believe that the tragedy could have been averted if there had been serious attention by the United Nations when it recognized the secession and independence of that Republic from the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
 We think that the United Nations should set up a modern system of trusteeship that could be set in motion whenever necessary to prevent human catastrophes like that in Bosnia.
 Today, this is dictated by the situation in Kosovo, which is very close to posing a potential threat like that posed by Bosnia; it is dictated also by the situations in Rwanda, Somalia, Haiti and other places.
 As we said last year, we are in favour of United Nations intervention wherever there are clear signs, as determined by early-warning monitoring, of a threat of human catastrophe.
 As we all know, the consequences of such catastrophes have negative effects on regional and international peace and security.
 For Pakistan, as would have been obvious this morning, India is an obsession.
 We do not want the General Assembly's trust to be abused by Pakistan as much as its patience has been, and I want therefore to place some facts on record.
 First, our offer of dialogue is open, and if Pakistan responds, we will not need a third party either as broker or facilitator or umpire.
 Pakistan has refused to talk and is trying to create an impression that bilateralism has never worked and that a threat to regional peace is imminent.
 The Simla Agreement, which has kept the peace between us for 23 years, was bilaterally negotiated.
 India continues to respect the letter and spirit of the Simla Agreement.
 Nothing, I repeat nothing, has happened on the international border or on the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir of late to suggest a failure of this mechanism or to give rise to any apprehension about a threat to peace.
 We have no intention of crossing the Line of Control or the international border, despite the grave provocations from across the border.
 What are these provocations? The Pakistan Foreign Minister said this morning that his country did not support the terrorists militarily.
 The same Human Rights Watch which he quoted so selectively to criticize both the United States and India, has this to say in its report:
 A constitutional and legal apartheid exists in Pakistan in relation to religious minorities, and even with regard to minority sects within the majority community.
 Several hundred thousand Pakistani citizens have languished from 1972 in refugee camps in another country, because Pakistan denies them the right of return to their own country.
 Nor has the Pakistani Foreign Minister told us of another group of his country's citizens who refused to enroll as voters in elections last year because they preferred to be disenfranchised rather than accept a state-given label for their faith.
 Pakistan is a society at war with itself.
 The territorial ambitions of Pakistan in Kashmir are overt and blatant.
 Every Pakistani leader since 1947 has described the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir as an integral part, sometimes as the jugular vein, of Pakistan.
 Pakistan deludes the world by talking about self-determination.
 It has incorporated without any legality that part of Jammu and Kashmir known as the Northern Areas; another part of the state illegally occupied by Pakistan is obliged by Pakistani law to proclaim its integration with Pakistan.
 In the Pakistani vocabulary, self-determination is apparently synonymous with predetermination as ordained by Pakistan.
 What Pakistan wants is to grab territory which legally and constitutionally belongs to another country.
 It is this expansionist and adventurist aim which has led Pakistan, as acknowledged by a former chief of the Pakistan Air Force last August, to start three wars against India.
 The Prime Minister of Pakistan immediately preceding Mrs. Bhutto stated very recently that Pakistani Government agencies had endeavoured to finance these clandestine operations by selling heroin and other narcotic drugs; this was reported in graphic detail by The Washington Post on 12 September.
 The people of Jammu and Kashmir are citizens of India, and they must be allowed to enjoy the same rights and privileges as other citizens of the nation without the threat of the gun.
 They have repeatedly exercised their franchise, and the current political process undertaken in the state is aimed at enabling the people of Jammu and Kashmir to participate in the electoral process again very shortly to choose their own representatives.
 We can sum up Pakistan's record in terms of its own admissions.
 This struggle is not of India's choosing.
 We in India close no doors.
 Our offer of talks with Pakistan on all subjects at any time, in India or Pakistan, at official or ministerial level, has remained unanswered for many months.
 Let Pakistan answer it instead of seeking alibis.
 Pakistan believes that the incessant repetition of falsehoods will turn them into truth.
 We know that the representative of Pakistan will again repeat his oft-repeated arguments in his reply to this statement.
 I assure the Assembly that we have no intention of wasting its time any more on a subject which is not relevant to it.
 Mr. Akram (Pakistan): My delegation is constrained to respond to the string of falsehoods which have been mouthed by my colleague from India.
 He began his statement with the biggest falsehood, which is that Kashmir is a part of India.
 In all its resolutions on this subject the Security Council has decided that the final disposition of Kashmir shall be determined by its people through a United Nations-supervised plebiscite.
 The maps of the United Nations all show Kashmir as disputed territory.
 In Kashmir, the oldest United Nations peace-keeping force is deployed at present along the cease-fire line.
 Above all, the people of Kashmir do not consider themselves as part of India.
 On India's independence day, 15 August, all the houses and huts of the Kashmiris flew black flags of protest.
 The day before, on Pakistan's independence day, those same houses and huts flew the star and crescent of Pakistan.
 The Kashmiri people are part of Pakistan.
 They are being kept apart from us by the bullets and bayonets of India's 600,000-strong army in Kashmir.
 This is the largest occupation force in the world and in colonial history.
 Let India say this to the people of Nepal, of Bhutan, of Sri Lanka, of Bangladesh, of Sind, or of its own provinces of Punjab, Assam and Tripura, where the Indian army has been involved in interventions time and time again.
 This country, which professes the principles of the peaceful Ahims of Mahatma Gandhi, has engaged in the largest number of conflicts of any State represented in this Hall.
 At any given moment, Indian armed forces are being employed in the use of massive force to repress people who have rebelled against the impositions of this country.
 India has spoken about terrorism.
 What about Indian terrorism in Kashmir? What about an 11-year-old girl, Fatima, who was sleeping with her mother when the Indian forces entered and shot her? This is from a report of 11 September 1994 - a few days ago - in the Toronto Star.
 Terrorism is the use of indiscriminate force against innocent people.
 As my Minister has said, by that yardstick alone India is the biggest terrorist State in the world.
 On 15 August, the Prime Minister of India threatened Pakistan in a speech.
 Indian statesmen have advocated the use of hot pursuit across the Line of Control to strike at so-called camps in Azad Kashmir.
 This is India's design to intimidate Pakistan.
 Almost all of the third largest army in the world is deployed against Pakistan.
 Our civilians are being targeted every day.
 If India wishes us to believe otherwise, let it accept the United Nations Military Observer Group on its side of the Line of Control.
 Pakistan is also committed to dialogue in order to promote peaceful relations with India and to resolve the Kashmir dispute.
 But we have tried for 22 years to promote this dialogue with India, and it has resulted in a dead end.
 India says it has not violated the Simla Agreement.
 But let me ask my colleague from India: What about Siachin? Did Indian forces not march into Siachin in violation of the Simla Agreement? And are not these forces still in the Siachin glacier, refusing to withdraw, in contravention of the Simla Agreement?
 India says it desires talks.
 India desires talks when the General Assembly meets, when the Commission on Human Rights meets, when it is afraid that the international community will censure its violations of human rights.
 India cannot talk peace with Pakistan and make war on the Kashmiri people.
 Let India stop making war on the Kashmiri people.
 We shall be ready to sit at the table with India on that day.
 The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.
 President Muluzi (Malawi): I congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Malawi is proud of you and of your country, Ce d'Ivoire, as you represent Africa in that very important post.
 I join other delegations in paying tribute to your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Samuel Insanally of Guyana.
 Mr. Insanally fulfilled his mandate very well indeed, despite the many difficult tasks the United Nations had to carry out during the past year.
 My delegation wishes Ambassador Insanally well in his future endeavours.
 The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has once again demonstrated that he is the right man to lead our Organization as it continues to assume greater responsibilities, particularly in the maintenance of international peace and security.
 The Secretary-General has ably led the Organization in responding most positively to the many conflict situations that beset the world today.
 My Government lends its support to his considerable efforts aimed at assuring international peace and security and at promoting economic and social development around the world.
 We wish him all the best in carrying out his arduous tasks.
 As I address the Assembly today, 30 years after the only time my predecessor did so, I bring with me a message of renewed hope and friendship from the people of a newly democratic Republic of Malawi to all the peoples of all the States represented here this morning.
 Freed from fears of itself, Malawi courageously embraces the rest of the family of nations; freed from self-imposed isolation, Malawi stands ready to engage actively in efforts to find international solutions to the problems of our times.
 Let me assure the Assembly that the Malawian people shall never allow any form of dictatorship to rear its ugly head on their soil again.
 The changes in Malawi resulted also from the concerted efforts and assistance of the international community.
 The Electoral Assistance Division of the Secretariat here in New York, the Centre for Human Rights in Geneva and the office of the United Nations Development Programme in Malawi all worked tirelessly to help us set up the necessary institutional framework for bringing about the desired political change.
 Let me also thank the Commonwealth Secretariat, the Organization of African Unity, the friendly Governments and the non-governmental organizations that were involved in our transition process for the invaluable assistance they too rendered to Malawi during this very critical and delicate stage of our nation's evolution.
 It is my sincere hope that our partners in the democratic transition will consider ways in which they can continue to work with the Malawian people as they confront the many serious problems arising from the excesses and vagaries of the discredited order they recently overturned.
 We have emphasized that our struggle was not about personalities or individual leaders, but rather about changing the political way of life.
 It is therefore pleasing that recently the Government and one of the opposition parties, the Alliance for Democracy (AFORD), reached an agreement that facilitated the appointment to the Cabinet of some AFORD members, including Mr. Chakufwa Chihana, President of AFORD.
 My Government has refrained from any form of witch-hunting or revenge against members of the former regime.
 In this context, my Government will guarantee all persons accused of wrongdoing the opportunity to be heard in an open court of law.
 Education in Human Rights has thus a prominent place in the programmes that are envisaged.
 This is because my Government firmly believes that the rule of law in Malawi can be consolidated if the people know and understand what their rights are.
 Basic human rights and fundamental freedoms cannot however be meaningfully enjoyed where people are living in conditions of economic desperation.
 The focus on the alleviation of poverty is intended to help consolidate the freedom and democracy that Malawians currently enjoy.
 Malawi's external debt is also quite high.
 At the end of June 1994, the external debt stock stood at $1.9 billion.
 Malawi's balance of payments position is precarious.
 Meanwhile, Malawi continues to suffer from the effects of the severe drought of 1992-1993, which afflicted the whole of southern Africa.
 The country is once again experiencing serious food shortages, owing primarily to very poor rains in the 1993-1994 season.
 The country urgently needs nearly 400,000 metric tons of grain, mainly maize, if it is to avert mass starvation and death among the people.
 The ones hardest hit by this scourge are the young and most productive segment of the population.
 Malawi continues to suffer also from the after-effects of the influx of refugees of recent years.
 It is thus quite clear that fulfillment of the Government's policy for the alleviation of poverty will be a major challenge indeed.
 The task ahead is enormous.
 My Government is, however, determined to meet the challenges head-on.
 In this context, my Government is working out a programme of poverty alleviation that will be flexible and implementable, and which can benefit from tangible and active assistance from the donor community.
 A Presidential Council on Poverty Alleviation, under my chairmanship, has been established to advise the Government on the actual implementation of the programmes envisaged.
 The programmes will also give special attention to the situation of children.
 To date, there are 3.2 million children in school an increase of 1.3 million from last year.
 Efforts are under way to close the gender gap in primary and higher education and to ensure the participation of women in decision-making.
 We look forward to participating in the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing in 1995.
 I have broadly outlined the problems and challenges that Malawi faces.
 I am very confident that our partners in development will continue to assist us as we forge ahead in our efforts to improve the standard of living of our people.
 I wish to appeal specifically for donor sympathy to write off existing loans made to the Malawi Government.
 I wish to assure you, Mr. President, that any assistance that is given to Malawi will be used for the purpose and target groups intended.
 The investment climate in Malawi is very favourable, and opportunities exist in such areas as tourism, mining, finance and banking, and distribution.
 Malawi welcomes the efforts to redefine the role of the United Nations in matters pertaining to development.
 The priority areas for development outlined in the report deserve the political commitment, active support and tangible assistance of the international financial and donor community.
 The key and persistent problem areas of concern external debt and debt servicing, poor access to science and technology for development, inadequate financial flows, rapid population growth, and problems relating to women and to social development need to be tackled head-on.
 Africa is particularly afflicted by these problems and deserves focused attention.
 The crisis situation facing Africa calls for urgent and important measures, such as those outlined in the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s, which has yet to be implemented.
 These measures, as augmented by the conclusion of the Tokyo Conference on African Development, should be given active support.
 Malawi regards the recommended priorities for development in the Agenda for Development and the Programme of Action outlined in the New Agenda for the Development of Africa as being complementary and critical to the development of Africa.
 Many positive political developments have taken place in Africa in recent times.
 The current wave of democratization has reached many parts of the continent, including the southern Africa region, and apartheid has been buried.
 Let me take this opportunity to congratulate the people of South Africa on their first truly democratic general elections, held in April this year, which ushered in the multiracial Government led by His Excellency Mr. Nelson Mandela.
 The present Malawi Government is pleased that South Africa has finally and proudly resumed its seat in the General Assembly and in all the other bodies of the United Nations, as a free country.
 The people of Malawi have close social, cultural, economic and other relations with the people of Mozambique; thus their joy is our joy and their sorrow is our sorrow.
 We therefore welcome wholeheartedly the fact that the General Peace Agreement is so far being implemented satisfactorily.
 We wish the people of Mozambique every success as they draw nearer to the election date.
 They deserve to live in honour and dignity.
 They have a right to a peaceful present and a hopeful future.
 Southern Africa requires peace, security and political stability to enable it to harness and direct its vast human and natural resources towards economic growth and sustainable development.
 We are thus encouraged by the indications of some progress in the peace talks that have been going on in Lusaka, Zambia, under the auspices of the United Nations.
 We fervently look forward to the conclusion of a mutually agreed final resolution to the longstanding political deadlock and armed conflict in Angola.
 The peaceful resolution of conflicts in other parts of Africa would give us in Malawi equal joy and comfort.
 We are, however, gratified that the horrible carnage we saw in Rwanda recently has since come to an end and that the cholera epidemic and the outbreak of dysentery in the refugee camps in eastern Zaire have now been brought under control.
 In this connection, let me most sincerely thank the Belgian Government for providing the Malawi troop contingent in UNAMIR with logistical and other support.
 We wish them well in this noble endeavour.
 My Government has followed closely the situation in Western Sahara.
 While the General Assembly has been seized of the situation in that Territory, we note with much concern that real interest in this issue appears to diminish every year.
 It seems that the Assembly has begun routinely to adopt resolutions that, in fact, are leading directly to international acquiescence in the status quo.
 We therefore call upon the international community, and in particular the United Nations, to live up to its responsibilities and fulfil its promise to the Sahouri people by acting without any further delay to hold the long-awaited referendum on that Territory's political future.
 My Government has followed with equally keen interest developments in other regions of the world.
 Recently delegations from the United States and Cuba met in this historic city and, through negotiations unfettered by preconditions, were able to reach a mutually agreeable solution to a dispute that had heightened tension between the two countries.
 We believe that, through a similar approach, these two neighbouring countries could also resolve such differences as have divided them for nearly 40 years.
 Five years after the fall of the Berlin Wall and after the cold war was declared over, we can see no reason why these two great nations should not sheathe their cold-war sabres and embrace each other for the sake of peace and progress in their region.
 My Government therefore eagerly looks forward to the day when it can join the world in applauding the resumption of normal and friendly relations between Cuba and the United States.
 The founders of the United Nations set forth principles that have stood the test of time. The validity of the purposes of the Organization cannot be denied, even today.
 In our view, this Organization, with all its shortcomings, still represents a viable option for addressing the many political, socio-economic and other issues that confront our world today.
 Let us work together to emancipate our people from the socio-economic and other ills that hold them in bondage to misery in their daily lives.
 Let us work together to avert the escalation of conflict situations.
 But, better still, let us use this Organization to find ways to reduce, if not to eliminate, the causes of conflict situations; to reduce, if not to eliminate, the means by which conflicts are fuelled and perpetrated.
 In making these humble suggestions, we are inspired by the preamble to the Charter.
 On the eve of the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations Charter, let us resolve to make the Organization even more relevant for the next 50 years.
 Let us work to strengthen the United Nations.
 In this regard, we support the current efforts to reform the Security Council, provided that such reform is not at the expense of effectiveness.
 Let us all work together to rationalize the work programmes of the United Nations.
 Let the agenda of our Organization reflect the priorities of our time.
 At a time when global interdependence has become a reality, the people of Malawi look optimistically towards a reform of this Organization that will ensure that it can more effectively play its role in international efforts to achieve security and economic prosperity for all the peoples of the world.
 Sir Anerood Jugnauth (Mauritius): Let me say at the outset how pleased I am to see you, Sir, presiding over the General Assembly at this session.
 In addition to being a well-deserved tribute to you personally and to your country, your presidency is a distinct honour and privilege for Africa.
 Your task will definitely not be easy but we are confident that your wisdom and broad experience will help guide our Organization in discharging its leadership role in world affairs.
 I hasten to pledge to you my delegation's full cooperation and active participation in the deliberations ahead.
 We commend him for the clear vision and diligence with which he steered the work of the Organization.
 The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, equally deserves appreciation for having carried out his responsibilities with sagacity and serenity despite the complex and sensitive nature of the issues that have retained our attention this past year.
 However, there still remain a few areas where the process is not complete, but I firmly believe that it will not be long before we can boast of a totally free world.
 The United Nations of today is perceived differently from what it was less than a decade ago.
 The fabric of international relations is undergoing profound transformation.
 The numerous activities in such fields as peace-keeping, preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, humanitarian relief, election monitoring and supervision undertaken by the Organization during the past few years indicate that its leadership and potential to play an active role on the international scene have been recognized.
 But we should all accept the obvious reality that the United Nations, despite its potential and goodwill, does not have the material capacity nor can it muster the financial resources to attend to every potential or actual crisis situation.
 While it has become evident that solutions to the present-day crises cannot but be evolved within the framework of international cooperation, such cooperation, however, is still lacking or, where it does exist, is but lukewarm in substance.
 That is why, despite the end of super-Power rivalry which, in theory, should have eased tensions the world over, conflicts and tensions have continued to flare up.
 On the eve of the fiftieth anniversary of the Organization can we not pledge and dedicate ourselves to that goal and recommit our efforts to that end?
 My delegation believes that the United Nations, given its universality, should inevitably continue to have a central and important role in the universal management of our society.
 It is our hope that the wide spectrum of views expressed so far on this subject, though seemingly divergent, would eventually converge to become a consensual approach that would render the Council more transparent and democratic.
 In this context, while considering an increase in the permanent membership of the Council, one should not be biased in favour of the economic giants of this world alone.
 The developing countries have a legitimate right to be represented on the permanent slate of the Security Council, for our concerns are different from those of the industrialized and developed countries.
 While we do not favour too radical a reform, we believe that the decisions of the Council should be arrived at by consensus rather than through veto power.
 Such decisions would obviously be more easily acceptable to the international community.
 However, the present veto system should be maintained for some time to come.
 It is a fact that the United Nations has been playing a more active role in world affairs and has been assuming greater responsibilities in the fields of peace-keeping and mediation in conflicts in a number of countries.
 But the restructuring exercise needs to address other levels of our Organization as well, so as to embrace the development dimension of international relations.
 In this respect, one should not shy away from a possible review of the United Nations Charter itself, but the process, we believe, should be gradual and consensual.
 It is opportune here to remind ourselves of what, as far back as 1945, the then United States Secretary of State reported to President Truman on the result of the San Francisco Conference. He said:
 The battle of peace has to be fought on two fronts.
 The first is the security front where victory spells freedom from fear.
 The second is the economic and social front where victory means freedom from want.
 No provisions that can be written into the Charter will enable the Security Council to make the world secure from war if men and women have no security in their homes and jobs.
 the development imperative is as much a priority for the United Nations as the imperative of peace. ... There can be no sustainable development without peace.
 There can also be no real peace without development.
 In this respect, the plight of Africa is well known to the world community.
 The causes of its ills and of its weaknesses are well documented.
 While the disease has been diagnosed, the cure is not yet in sight.
 Africa needs a new order with a clear vision of hope that will ensure its gradual integration into the international economic and trading systems. Its marginalization, deliberate or accidental, must be stopped and reversed.
 Since the last decade, the rapid strides we have been making in the economic field have been accompanied by consistent progress in the social and cultural fields, as well as in the strengthening of the democratic framework.
 Basic rights and freedoms, such as freedom of speech, of association and of movement, and the holding of general elections at regular intervals of five years with the free participation of political parties and individuals are an integral part of our culture.
 Our experience exemplifies the synthesis that is being achieved through economic development, which brings dignity to the population; social development, for the protection of the weaker sections of the population; and the strengthening of all democratic institutions, for the evolution of a harmonious society.
 The report by the Secretary-General entitled An Agenda for Development is therefore timely and will no doubt place the issue of development in its different aspects in a prominent place on the international agenda.
 The Secretary-General needs to be commended for this interesting report, which highlights the multidimensional nature of development.
 The report has been further enriched by the constructive proposals contained in the Ministerial Declaration of the Group of 77 adopted on 24 June 1994 in New York.
 I commend this Declaration as an important contribution by the developing world to the debate on the report.
 Only through such commitments and shared responsibilities and action in an increasingly interdependent world will it be possible to stop the further marginalization of a large number of developing countries and help integrate them in a just and equitable international economic, financial and trading system.
 Next year will witness the establishment and setting up of the World Trade Organization, which is expected to contribute towards the development of an integrated, more viable and durable multilateral trading system.
 Genuine fears have been voiced by a number of developing countries, especially small island States, that are vulnerable to natural disasters and suffer from the disadvantages of being far from their sources of supply of raw materials and foodstuffs and the markets for their export products.
 My own country stands to be affected both as an exporter and as a net food-importing country.
 We therefore appeal for steps to be taken, as provided for in the Final Act of the GATT Uruguay Round, to provide adequate compensation for any such loss.
 I should like here to stress the need for the preservation of the existing preferential trade regime of the Lom Convention of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group and the European Economic Community.
 Any attempt to bring in new issues concerning the multilateral trading system, including the World Trade Organization, would not be appropriate at this juncture.
 In this regard, it would serve no useful purpose for the developed and the developing countries to adopt confrontational positions while dealing with such sensitive issues as the social clause and the trade regime and trade and the environment.
 However, I also believe taking as an example my own country, where worker's rights are protected by the Constitution, that internationally recognized labour standards and norms and the legitimate rights of workers should be respected.
 I am happy to state, in that context, that my Government recently introduced legislation to ensure that workers participate in the management of enterprises and become shareholders in the sugar sector where they are employed.
 This leads me to the forthcoming World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World Conference on Women and the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), to be held next year.
 In our view, all these conferences are geared towards one simple goal: to better the lot of mankind, and in so doing, to enhance human dignity.
 It is our sincere and cherished hope that these summit meetings and conferences will contribute to the debate on the Agenda for Development and will encourage a better understanding of the nature and complexity of the development problems facing the developing world.
 May these conferences come up with reasonable and concrete proposals, backed by a clear commitment of resources for their implementation.
 They have modified the nature of international relations, with strategic economic alliances replacing military ones in a world still in search of a new order which thus far has remained elusive.
 In such an uncertain and volatile situation, where the survival of the fittest and of the most competitive is the order of the day, small and economically vulnerable countries need assurances with regard to their security and continued economic development and social progress.
 I therefore appeal to the international community to fully support the successful implementation of regional cooperation and integration programmes, especially the nascent ones in Africa.
 In our own region, organizations such as the Indian Ocean Commission, the Preferential Trade Area for Eastern and Southern African States and the Southern African Development Community are useful vehicles for economic cooperation and integration among member countries and help to strengthen our economies.
 Political stability, good governance, respect for basic human rights and freedoms are prerequisites to economic development.
 The serious plight of hundreds of thousands of refugees from Rwanda remains a major source of concern.
 We should redouble efforts and commit ourselves to urgently addressing such human catastrophes of epic proportions, which, if left unattended or if tackled timidly, may very well spill over into neighbouring countries of the region and affect them adversely.
 I should like to use the opportunity of speaking before this forum to appeal to my brothers in Angola, Liberia and Somalia and elsewhere in Africa, where pockets of tension exist that can flare up into unnecessary conflicts, to apply peaceful means to resolve and iron out their differences.
 It would be fitting here to flag Mozambique as an example where dialogue has prevailed over armed struggle, and where, in a few days' time, the people will be exercising their freedom of choice to elect those they wish to govern the country.
 Similarly, it is a matter of satisfaction that the constitutional problem in Lesotho has been resolved peacefully and through constant dialogue.
 In that respect, I should like to commend the efforts deployed by my brothers, Presidents Mugabe, Masire and Mandela.
 Indeed, the positive developments in the Middle East mark a turning point in the inter-State relationships in that region and augur well for peace and stability.
 In this regard, let me make an earnest appeal to Pakistan and to India, countries equally dear and near to us, not to internationalize their differences but to address them bilaterally through peaceful means.
 That is why we continue to hope for speedy positive developments in such places as Fiji, where equality of citizenship is yet to prevail.
 Mauritius has made its position amply clear on this issue.
 We have stated in no uncertain terms that the world cannot be divided permanently into countries permitted to have nuclear weapons and countries not permitted to have them.
 A treaty perceived as making such a decision permanent is bound to fail and cannot be expected to last.
 Without the convincing support of the NPT members, we may fail in our endeavours to make the world nuclear-weapon-free.
 The recent dispute between a Member State of the Treaty and the International Atomic Energy Agency clearly indicates that the NPT is not infallible.
 Equally alarming is the trading in enriched uranium and plutonium, in stark contradiction of the objectives of the Treaty.
 As long as there are nuclear-weapon States, there will be an urge for other States with nuclear potential to acquire such weapon-grade material, thus putting the world community in jeopardy.
 As Acting President of the Conference of Heads of State or Government of French-speaking countries, I should like to say a few words in the French language, which brings together this community of dialogue and cooperation numbering 47 countries with more than 400 million inhabitants.
 Since 1986, the highest officials of these countries, which are found on the five continents, have been regularly holding summit meetings to review those problems that affect the francophone world and seek together for solutions to global problems.
 My country thus had the honour of hosting the Fifth Summit of the Francophone World last October.
 We live in a society that integrates the linguistic, religious and social contributions of Europe, Africa and Asia.
 The theme of Unity in Diversity, which inspired the work of that Summit, is very dear to our country.
 All the segments of the Mauritian nation participate in creating a national identity while preserving their ancestral cultures.
 This message of unity in diversity, based on the recognition of difference and on human solidarity, is even more relevant in the difficult and complex situation in today's world.
 The Heads of State or Government wish the francophone world to cooperate more closely with regional and international organizations that are working for democracy, peace and the development of the world first and foremost, of course, is the United Nations.
 We have adopted a series of resolutions to promote this new partnership.
 During the Summit, we were able to intensify a dialogue that we have been maintaining since then by various means.
 However, we hardly had time to acquire the means to implement our own resolutions when events began to move rapidly in the francophone world.
 Indeed, on the day following the Mauritius Summit, our brother Melchoir Ndadaye, President of Burundi, was brutally assassinated.
 Then the situation deteriorated in Rwanda, and once again we notified these two international forums.
 We have been following developments in that country very closely, and we were gratified to note that positive steps have been taken towards re-establishing democracy.
 The francophone world, for its part, has adopted numerous resolutions aimed at securing for the Francophone community a more dynamic presence internationally.
 I should like, in particular, to cite a resolution endorsing the Secretary-General's report, which is rightly entitled An Agenda for Development.
 At the Rio de Janeiro Summit, later in Vienna, then in Barbados and in Cairo, and tomorrow in Copenhagen and in Beijing, the countries of the francophone world are consulting on the major problems the United Nations has inscribed on its agenda.
 This is being done to arrive at common positions for meeting the great challenges of development.
 Such concerted action is essential for the harmonious development of our world at the dawn of the third millennium; hence we are called upon to make a specific contribution to illustrate that spirit of humanism that motivates the francophone world.
 The francophone world has an original and positive message to spread through the world, a message of liberty, solidarity and sharing.
 I am most pleased to have conveyed it to you.
 In accordance with General Assembly resolution 48/26, the title of item 33 should read: Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and related matters.
 This change will be reflected in the documents to be issued subsequently.
 Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 May I also express our appreciation to Ambassador Samuel Insanally of Guyana for having successfully guided the work of the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session and further enhanced its centrality.
 The cold war has ended, and totalitarianism has met its nemesis.
 We must meet this challenge and collectively reconstruct a truly just order for our time and for the generations to come.
 Indeed, the global community has reached many significant milestones.
 More nations have agreed to resolve their disputes by peaceful means.
 South Africa has emerged from its political catharsis as a nation free of apartheid and with majority rule; Cambodia experienced free and democratic elections; and lasting peace in West Asia came closer to realization with the Israeli-Palestinian accords.
 The path ahead is strewn with uncertainties and pitfalls.
 The North-South divide in wealth, power and control over resources is still too pronounced to be ignored, and the redistribution of global prosperity is far from being realized.
 The paramount challenge facing the global community today is to fulfil the promises made in recent years of systemic change in the global environment.
 This is to be achieved through sustained efforts in regard to economic development and through the strengthening of civil society and multilateral institutions.
 Development is the only secure foundation for global peace and security, for the origins of conflicts are often very deeply rooted in socio-economic deprivation and disparities.
 As for civil society, its growth into maturity requires the establishment of institutions for a stable and responsive social order, a democratic participatory arrangement as a means to channel political energy, and an environment in which culture can flourish.
 In all these areas, it is the people that matter their freedom, security and development.
 All great traditions of mankind, East and West, concur in the sanctity of the human person, the family as a fundamental unit of society, and the primacy of moral and ethical values as a foundation of civilizations.
 The sanctity of the human person warrants the State's protection of the inalienable rights of all to freedom, to participate in social, political and cultural processes and to optimize the potential of the human person through development.
 The promise made at the 1992 Rio Summit remains unfulfilled.
 If no increased official development assistance is forthcoming and the international target of 0.7 per cent is not met, this will represent a serious reneging on the Rio commitments, notwithstanding the Global Environment Facility.
 This will raise questions as to the commitment of the North to pledges made at major conferences.
 At the Rio Summit, the developed countries declared that the tropical forests belonged to the whole world.
 It was maintained that these forests must always remain in order to maintain biological diversity and sustain ecological balance.
 If indeed the tropical forest is the heritage of mankind, the responsibility for its protection must necessarily be collective.
 While the South-East Asian countries will take the necessary measures, we appeal to the global community, especially the richer members, to help us put out this fire on an urgent and priority basis.
 We regard the issue of global population as inseparable from the overall concern of development.
 While we share the fundamental objectives of the Conference on Population and Development in Cairo, we deplore the attempt to impose views without regard for the values of others.
 The peace dividend that we aspire to reap will not be realized without sustained growth in the global economy.
 However, growth prospects are often hampered by short-sighted policies and structural crises within the industrial economies.
 Viewed in this light, the popular call for macroeconomic stabilization should not be confined to the developing countries alone but instead should encompass both the developing and the industrial economies.
 It would be uncharitable to ignore altogether the outstanding contributions made to humanity by this world body and its agencies.
 It has provided a platform for international cooperation in the fields of education, law, health, culture, economics, refugee relief and so on.
 But more significantly, it has, by its very existence, prepared the groundwork for a global order that would be truly democratic and multicultural.
 However, as we draw up the balance sheet of that era and contemplate the challenges of the twenty-first century, we must take into serious account our many limitations.
 In the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina the Security Council remains paralysed in the implementation of its own resolutions.
 Within the United Nations itself, the peace-keeping operations decided on by the Security Council provide no clear institutional structure for consultation, especially between non-Security-Council member troop-contributing countries and Security Council members.
 Yet the major Powers are resisting the urgent need for regular consultations between the Security Council and troop-contributing countries.
 While the situation in Somalia clearly reflected the need for some form of United Nations involvement, if not intervention, there have been other operations where even countries in the region have been totally opposed to United Nations involvement.
 The role of major Powers, at least those that still deserve that status, is explicitly recognized in the Charter of the United Nations.
 Resistance from a few, whose own claims to being major Powers are becoming increasingly unpersuasive, should not be allowed to stand in the way of change.
 As the Council is unrepresentative, the first step towards reform must be to increase the numbers of non-permanent members.
 Hence, we cannot allow the present uncertainties about the structure and role of the United Nations to remain unresolved.
 A revitalized Economic and Social Council has the potential to coordinate and, it is hoped, harmonize policies emanating from separate bodies such as the G-7 and the Bretton Woods institutions.
 In this regard priority must be accorded to an Agenda for Development which would provide the new framework for international development cooperation, the basis for a truly global partnership.
 The major Powers must not slacken the momentum towards effective non-proliferation and comprehensive test-ban treaties, critical to our collective resolve to halt the arms race and eliminate the utilization of weapons of mass destruction.
 Malaysia is prepared to make an early commitment to the goals of true globalism and, with a genuine mechanism reposing in the United Nations, to a new world system for international peace, security and development.
 The world is heterogeneous and multicultural.
 Meaningful discourse cannot be limited by the narrowness of parameters or an overbearing sense of cultural supremacy.
 We must strive to overcome and transcend unproductive polarizations.
 None the less, they must not impede efforts to seek and implement genuine solutions for our common good and shared problems.
 We must accept the new realities, particularly the far-reaching systemic transformations in the global economy.
 The growing economic strength of East Asia and the newly industrializing countries will invariably bring about a new equation of power and responsibility in global affairs.
 We are fully aware of the many shortcomings inherent within East Asia; its remarkable economic performance is far from miraculous.
 Nevertheless, its experience portrays the path of change towards the qualitative search for excellence.
 Political stability was appropriated to garner efforts for economic growth which ultimately became the means to empower the people.
 Development is enriched by multiculturalism where the practice of tolerance and moderation has turned religious and ethnic diversity from being a source of conflict into an ingredient for success.
 In a world torn by ethnic and religious passions and cultural prejudices, the experience of South-East Asia in multiculturalism may provide some clues for devising the means for peaceful coexistence and productive partnership among citizens of the global village.
 With the memory of war still fresh, he said:
 We must serve our apprenticeship and at every stage try to develop forms of international coexistence as far as is possible at the moment.
 That apprenticeship has now been served.
 It must progress and transform itself from being a theatre for the concert of a few powerful nations into an effective and representative vehicle for global governance.
 The East-West blocs have been replaced by North-South blocs.
 The wealthy North is worried because the poor South is a threat to its serenity and comfort.
 Our world is facing a threefold crisis political and economic crises and a crisis of human society which is sorely testing international solidarity and the interdependence of States.
 The many hotbeds of tension in Latin America, Europe, Asia and Africa arouse anxiety and concern in our Organization.
 A number of ideas have been put forward to check these evils on a global scale, with greater or lesser degrees of success, but we feel that the best approach lies in the old saying: An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.
 Preventive diplomacy seems to us to be decisive in maintaining and promoting peace, as recent world history shows.
 Indeed, it is clear that many current conflicts might have been avoided had the international community involved itself in time to prevent them from worsening.
 A review of the roots of this tragedy shows that the implementation of preventive diplomacy could have prevented it or at least mitigated its effects.
 If we go back to the earliest manifestations of the ethnic conflict between Hutus and Tutsis, we see many opportunities to resolve it which the international community passed up.
 It is clear that if the parties involved had respected the Arusha Agreements, the Rwandese tragedy would not have taken on its current dimensions.
 It is equally clear that the international community could have guaranteed respect for these Agreements.
 Moreover, the presence on Rwandese soil of foreign and international troops shortly before and during the massacres could have prevented them.
 What are these problems?
 Millions of Rwandese left their country and took refuge in neighbouring countries.
 Zaire, for instance, had to absorb nearly 3 million people in less than three months.
 The little city of Goma, with a normal population of 200,000, on 14 June alone took in 10,000 refugees a minute.
 The modern world has never seen such an uprooting of populations.
 The effects of such a situation could only be tragic: the swamping of infrastructures, the re-emergence of endemic disease, housing shortages, the devastation of crops, environmental destruction, disputes among people living in close quarters, insecurity, and countless other examples.
 In addition to all this, the nationality problem is worsening and it was already a matter of concern in that part of Zaire.
 The current situation in countries bordering Rwanda meets all the preconditions for preventive intervention by the international community.
 Of course, it is already engaged in humanitarian operations on behalf of the refugees.
 My delegation takes this opportunity to thank all the countries and organizations involved in these operations.
 France in particular deserves a special tribute for having saved so many lives in Operation Turquoise.
 But it is high time that the international community moved beyond the humanitarian aspect towards a solution of the fundamental causes of the Rwandese tragedy and its effects on neighbouring countries.
 Yet we note that none of the countries directly concerned by this phenomenon can cope on its own with the situation without assistance from the international community.
 The tragedy of Rwanda, which occurred shortly before the installation of our current Government in Zaire, could benefit only from stop-gap measures on the part of our Government, given the already disturbing situation of the economy in Zaire and the problems remain unsolved.
 From this rostrum, Zaire issues a fervent appeal to the international community for support equal to the difficulties experienced by our population.
 It is thus urgent that the world help these two ethnic groups to learn how to live together again in harmony.
 Situated in the heart of Africa, Zaire is a country in deep crisis.
 Since the beginning of this decade, Zaire has been experiencing a serious institutional crisis, punctuated by individual events which have contributed to destroying all the basic balances of our economy.
 Our country just barely averted a crisis which could have been comparable to the one in Rwanda.
 As we know, the democratization process initiated in Zaire on 24 April 1990 was one of the most tumultuous of the entire African continent.
 National unity was harmed by the reappearance of centrifugal and sectarian movements.
 Ethnic tensions erupted here and there throughout the country.
 In short, we might well have experienced the same phenomena of massacres and mass displacements of populations we deplore in Rwanda.
 Zaire succeeded in averting this great tragedy owing in large part to the timely assistance provided by the international community.
 We do not wish to minimize either the wisdom and the work done by the internal forces in Zaire, or the ongoing support from what we call the troika: the group of countries consisting of Belgium, France and the United States of America.
 The results of these meetings were of major political importance because they put an end to the duplication of constitutional texts as well as of institutions of transition towards a new democratic republic.
 On 11 July 1994 the transitional parliament established a Government which represents the majority of the people of Zaire.
 This Government intends to conduct the nation's politics exclusively through parliamentary control.
 I am thinking not of the resources needed at particular moments for example to organize and hold free and transparent elections.
 I am referring to the substantial resources needed to stabilize the economic and social environment, which will provide the framework for democratization.
 This stability has long been ignored, but today is increasingly being recognized as the prerequisite for progress towards democracy.
 When a country relies only on its national efforts to resolve all of those ills, it very quickly gets locked into a vicious circle which only exacerbates its problems.
 The second crisis facing mankind is economic in nature.
 This crisis derives from structural lacunae and from the imbalance in interdependent areas such as those of commodities, trade, energy, currency and finance.
 Socio-economic conditions have worsened considerably in Zaire since the beginning of democratization.
 In the last five years, the basic balances of the Zaire economy have been completely destroyed.
 As a result, there is a particularly acute economic and financial crisis.
 This economic crisis has been accompanied by a profound moral crisis, which has led to plundering and systematic destruction of the economic fabric.
 It is equally obvious that Zaire cannot emerge all on its own from this situation.
 The current Government has of course included in its programme specific short-term measures to slow down somewhat the continuing deterioration of social conditions.
 But these measures and the Government's recovery plan as a whole can be effective only if they are supported by strengthened cooperation between Zaire and its bilateral and multilateral partners.
 However, as is known, this cooperation has been suspended, and most of Zaire's partners are making the resumption of such cooperation conditional on tangible progress being made towards democracy and progress in economic management.
 My country is not an isolated case.
 This kind of conditionality is increasingly a determining factor in cooperation between developing countries, particularly in Africa, and their multilateral and bilateral partners.
 In our search we must create new solutions, such as those that made it possible to rebuild Europe after the Second World War.
 Human society is falling prey to the re-emergence and supremacy of force and violence over the rule of law in relations between States, in contempt of all the rules of good conduct.
 Two thirds of the human race suffers from hunger, endemic disease, malnutrition, undernourishment, unemployment, lack of information, acculturation in short, total underdevelopment. The political and economic crisis also has a negative effect on society.
 My Government intends to make respect for human rights in Zaire one of its fundamental priorities of action.
 From this rostrum I make an appeal to the specialized agencies of our Organization to share their enriching experience with us and to help us effectively in realizing our aims.
 The establishment of institutions for our new, resolutely democratic republic will involve the organization in the near future of free, transparent and honest elections.
 My Government hopes to see the United Nations community join Zaire in this last stage of our long journey towards our goal a State of law by assisting in the preparation, organization and monitoring of these elections at all levels.
 Before concluding, I would just like to express to you, Mr. President, the great satisfaction my delegation feels at seeing you presiding over the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 We are all aware that your election is a tribute to your country, Ce d'Ivoire.
 We also wish to congratulate all the members of the General Committee.
 We extend our best wishes and our support to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his commitment and his tireless efforts to promote peace and respect for human rights.
 To sum up, I would simply say that I came here with three messages.
 The first one is that of the interdependence of nations in mutually beneficial cooperation and with no exclusions.
 Mr. Romulo (Philippines): Please allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the exalted office of President of the General Assembly.
 Your distinguished career and your experience in international affairs, together with your outstanding personal qualities, assure us of wise and skilled leadership at the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
 As we approach the fiftieth year of the life of our Organization, let us look back to the first principles of its existence.
 Let us see how we can apply those principles to the dynamic realities of our time and, to the extent that human discernment will allow, to the uncertain circumstances of the next half century.
 Mr. Biegman (Netherlands), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 Emerging from the unspeakable horror and devastation of untrammelled global conflict, the international community brought forth the United Nations as an instrument, above all, for preventing conflict and keeping the peace.
 As with any human institution, the United Nations record in this regard has been mixed.
 This we have seen in such places as Cyprus, Angola, Mozambique, Liberia and certain parts of the Middle East, including Lebanon.
 However, our founding fathers recognized from the very beginning that it is not enough to head off crises and intervene in conflicts, but that the roots of war and peace lie in the human condition and the human mind.
 It is thus there, at their roots, that mankind must deal with questions of war and peace.
 As we look back at this half-century, we see with extraordinary clarity that the enduring triumphs of the international community have come not with the imposition of outside force but when the deepest concerns of the nations and peoples involved are addressed and resolved.
 These triumphant achievements came in precisely those two areas that had most deeply engaged the United Nations for the greater part of its existence South Africa and the Middle East.
 In South Africa, national peace and reconciliation in a regime of democracy emerged victorious after decades of struggle, led by the United Nations, against apartheid and on behalf of human dignity, racial equality, majority rule and political pluralism.
 This happened only after most of the political forces in the country recognized these universal values as essential to the survival of the South African nation.
 In the Middle East, the dramatic breakthrough worked out by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) has opened the doors of hope for an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
 It finally occurred because the leaders of Israel and the PLO and other Arab leaders recognized the essential nature of these rights.
 The United Nations is certainly right to emphasize this important reality.
 Fortunately, many developing nations and the Philippines is proud to take its place among them have made hard political decisions and adopted economic policies favourable to dynamic and sustained economic growth.
 These are thus hopeful times for economic growth, at least for those countries in a position to take advantage of a more liberal international trading regime.
 However, as many countries, and the United Nations itself, have realized, economic development by itself is not enough.
 Raising the overall income of a nation is not enough.
 A larger gross national product does not necessarily mean a better life for the individual citizen.
 A bigger economy by itself does not satisfy the individual person's aspiration to human fulfilment.
 Indeed, economic growth cannot be sustained for long unless the individual citizen and the individual community have a stake in that growth and unless they are mobilized and empowered to take active part in the process of development.
 Economic growth would be meaningless to the individual who does not share in its benefits or whose community is destroyed by it.
 Development is empty for persons who are deprived of their individual rights and freedoms.
 A society cannot find fulfilment in growth, and indeed the development process itself is severely hampered, if it does not take adequate care of its vulnerable groups: women, children, ethnic minorities, the handicapped, the homeless.
 Development cannot be sustained unless the nurturing qualities of the natural environment are conserved for future generations.
 We in the Philippines have learned this lesson the hard way and are now applying it faithfully.
 We have secured peace and national reconciliation through a peace process that includes having sincere discussions with dissident elements and extending a generous amnesty to them.
 We have devolved extensive authority, responsibility and resources on local governments and communities, and we have restored the system of democratic pluralism, through which the people and their groups can thrash out their grievances and advance their interests in peace and with civility.
 At the same time, we have pursued a purposeful programme of economic development through the liberalization of the conditions governing trade, investments, and banking and finance, and through the privatization of Government enterprises.
 We have provided infrastructure facilities and generous incentives for domestic and foreign investors.
 These, together with the restoration of political stability, have placed us back on the road to economic recovery and self-sustaining growth.
 Part of this effort is the importance that we place on human-rights education for all, including the armed forces and the police, a mission that is mandated by a unique provision in our Constitution.
 We are expanding the empowerment of our people and their communities, particularly of the most vulnerable groups.
 We have devoted attention and resources to the concerns of women, including women workers, and of children, particularly those of the poor.
 We have protected the rights and culture of our ethnic minorities.
 And we have allocated substantial resources to health and education for the development of our people as our most valuable asset.
 We in the Philippines believe that this simultaneous and balanced approach to peace, development and the quality of individual lives must be applied in the international community as well as within nations, in the family of man as well as in national societies.
 The expansion of the global economy is important for peace in the world and the progress of nations, but it is not enough.
 Each country must have a stake in this expansion and an enlarged share of it.
 Even this is not enough.
 It must devote greater attention to care and respect for people and to the recognition of the inherent equality of all human beings regardless of gender, of age, of race, of religion, of language, of culture or of nationality.
 We must all remember that the sources of conflict do not lie only in disputes over territory or resources.
 As we know only too well, they arise also, and it seems increasingly, from intolerance of other people's beliefs and cultures and from the less than human treatment of people from other lands.
 Mankind has made progress in advancing the truth that there are certain things that transcend national boundaries and are the common heritage, the common concern and the common responsibility of all nations and of mankind as a whole.
 Among these are the environment and the oceans and their resources.
 There is something else that transcends national boundaries and summons global responsibility, something that is of infinitely greater worth than even the environment or the oceans.
 I speak specifically of migrant workers, refugees, children, the aged and the disabled, and the special concerns of the world's women.
 The transnational migration of workers is an increasingly prominent phenomenon of international life in our time.
 This is the result of supply and demand for workers seeking equilibrium.
 Migrant workers, however, are more than a commodity to be traded in the international market-place.
 They have the same dignity and rights as any of us in this Hall.
 Moreover, they make a vital contribution to the economies and societies of the countries in which they live and work.
 And yet, many countries, including developing countries, treat migrant workers as being less than the human beings that they are.
 At best, these workers are left unprotected by the law governing labour and employment.
 The international community, the United Nations, cannot allow the abuse of these vulnerable and valuable members of the human family to continue.
 The Secretary-General might form a group to submit recommendations to the Assembly at our next session on improving coordination of the various efforts of the United Nations on behalf of migrant workers.
 Natural and man-made disasters have created large-scale flows of refugees around the world.
 While the distinction between refugees and economic migrants has to be resolutely made, genuine refugees must be given all the protection that international conventions call for.
 Children, by their very nature, have a claim to mankind's protection and care.
 That claim is special in the case of street children, children coerced into drug addiction, refugee children and children in the areas of armed conflict or natural disasters.
 National societies and the international community must ensure that such children are provided with adequate food, medical care, shelter and education.
 We may need to draw up a convention dealing with the sale of children, child prostitution, child pornography and the nefarious trade in body parts of children.
 We also call upon the Ninth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders to take steps towards making gender-based violence a crime, especially violence against women migrant workers and the victims of the traffic in women.
 Underlying the need to safeguard the welfare of these vulnerable groups is the fundamental issue of human rights, the issue of respect for all people and their rights, the issue of their inherent equality as human beings.
 The United Nations has adopted numerous international instruments on human rights, beginning with the Universal Declaration.
 The Philippines is party to 21 of these.
 The United Nations must renew its commitment to foster compliance with these solemn covenants, always with respect for the sovereignty of nations.
 Since the concept of the inherent rights and equality of human persons resides in the minds of people, United Nations efforts in this regard must begin with education.
 Even as we refocus our concerns on basic human needs, we should not lose sight of the continuing, and even increased, importance of peace-keeping in the mandate of the United Nations.
 We must, however, make sure that the peace-keeping function does not divert resources from economic and social development, is not used by the major Powers simply to pursue their respective agendas, and is carried out in a transparent and democratic manner.
 The Philippines fully supports an approach to international peace and security that is based on securing friendly relations among peoples of different political, cultural, ethnic and religious backgrounds, respect for international law, and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
 We believe that the maintenance of international peace and security should not rest primarily on the use or threat of sanctions, armed force, or other coercive measures.
 The maintenance of international peace and security is a collective responsibility.
 The United Nations must ensure the international nature of all peace-keeping operations if it is to maintain their credibility.
 This would involve both enlarging the Council's membership and reforming its methods and procedures.
 Specifically, we believe that the Council's membership should be better balanced in terms of geographic distribution and increased representation of the developing countries.
 In the past two years, the General Assembly adopted two resolutions to this effect.
 Let us begin implementing their key provisions.
 Revitalization of the United Nations is demanded by the new circumstances and challenges of today's dynamic world.
 We suggest, however, that the Assembly consider the possible establishment of an independent advisory group to oversee the work and receive the reports of this Office.
 This would provide the checks and balances so necessary in a large organization such as the United Nations.
 As the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations approaches, we must ensure that the balance is maintained among the principal concerns of the Organization the maintenance of peace and security, the promotion of economic progress and the advancement of social development.
 This is a clear recognition by the international community of his wisdom, diplomatic skills and a sign of esteem for his country, Ce d'Ivoire.
 In this connection, we salute the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his efforts aimed at improving the work of the Organization and its efficiency so that it may face up to the challenges and changes of today's world.
 We are fully confident that by its return, it will effectively contribute to enhancing the work of the Organization.
 The end of the cold war has created a new climate in international relations as better prospects have emerged which promise to make possible the achievement of tangible progress towards finding solutions for a number of international problems.
 Such encouraging developments afford unprecedented opportunities for international cooperation in the interests of peace, security, stability and sustainable development.
 In a number of regions, the escalation of wars and regional conflicts poses a serious threat to international and regional peace and security and has led to a state of economic, social and developmental instability.
 New forms of racism, nationalism and religious fanaticism have emerged, and acts of violence and terrorism in all its forms take place.
 All these situations and factors impede the building of the better world of peace, coexistence, tolerance and prosperity after which humanity aspires.
 Therefore, we must intensify our efforts in support of what the Secretary-General has proposed in his report An Agenda for Peace, in order for that agenda to be translated into a concrete reality.
 I refer in particular to the proposals concerning the strengthening of cooperation, partnership and coordination between regional organizations and the United Nations, in line with the provisions of the Charter and the rules and norms of international law.
 The responsibilities of the Security Council have greatly increased over the past few years.
 This fact makes it necessary to ensure greater participation by all Member States, taking into account the fact that equitable and just geographic and regional distribution would contribute to the maintenance of international and regional peace and security.
 Developments in international and regional situations over the past years have made it clear that radical solutions to regional disputes can be reached only by peaceful means, through dialogue and negotiation between countries in accordance with the United Nations Charter and the rules and norms of international law.
 Proceeding from this, the policy of the United Arab Emirates is based on full and mutual respect for States' sovereignty and independence and for the principles of non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, good-neighbourliness and peaceful coexistence.
 Hence the initiative by the United Arab Emirates which called for serious and direct negotiations to put an end to the Iranian occupation of our three islands.
 My Country is pledged to accepting all that follows from the Judgment of the International Court as that Judgment would be based on legal arguments and documents.
 We hope that the international community will support this peaceful initiative, which is based on international legality.
 Although almost four years have elapsed since the liberation of the sisterly State of Kuwait, the Iraqi regime is still being selective in its implementation of the relevant resolutions of international legality, indifferent to the serious consequences.
 While we in the United Arab Emirates, with our brethren in the Gulf Cooperation Council, affirm the need to uphold the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq, we consider the international resolutions operative and mandatory.
 Short of the implementation of both these resolutions, there cannot be a positive climate conducive to peace and security in the region.
 The peace dividend, the product of the atmosphere of international cooperation in the wake of the Cold War era, has increasingly come to determine the characteristics and parameters of a new world order based on regional cooperation, for whose success peace is considered an indispensable prerequisite.
 This was also the reason why my country participated in the multilateral negotiations.
 We did not hesitate to grant humanitarian assistance in addition to our participation in the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II).
 We think that the international relief efforts cannot be successful in the worsening internal situation.
 My country is deeply concerned over the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly under the circumstances of the continued violation of its sovereignty and of the human rights of its people, especially the Muslims.
 The facts still indicate that Bosnian Serb forces and their supporters have not refrained for a single day from their acts of aggression or from perpetrating further crimes of ethnic cleansing and genocide.
 These Serbian actions aim at regional expansionist gains that violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 This will be realized only through a general orientation towards disarmament in all its forms, covering both nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction.
 While social issues are now at the forefront of international relations, the economic and developmental questions of developing countries are increasingly marginalized, and the economic disparities between developing and developed countries continues to widen as a result of the measures taken by developed countries.
 The persistence of these problems and the absence of a solution will lead to political and social tensions, which in turn will adversely affect international and regional peace and security.
 International economic integration has become a concrete reality that must be taken into account.
 There can be no doubt that this is a historic event and gives new momentum to the world economy.
 We hope that the setting up of this new organization will be a positive beginning that improves and enhances the prospects of economic, financial and international trade relations based on justice, co-equality and equity, with a view to bridging the gap between developed and developing countries.
 The spirit of tolerance and of adherence to noble cultural and humanitarian values, to the principles and purposes of the Charter and the rules of international law should be our beacon which guides our steps towards the future that we desire.
 The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
 The President (interpretation from French): In a letter contained in document A/49/400/Add.2 the Secretary-General informs me that, since the issuance of his communications dated 20 and 26 September, Burkina Faso has made the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
 Your well-deserved election, which honours all of Africa, is a tribute to your country, Ce d'Ivoire, with which the Central African Republic enjoys excellent relations of friendship, fraternity and cooperation.
 We also congratulate the Secretary-General, a worthy son of Africa, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who, as head of the Organization, made the preparations for the year of Africa.
 Those military regimes, which were anti-democratic because they were not elected, seized power and held freedom hostage, thereby curtailing the economic, social and cultural development of our nations.
 While the international community and the wealthy countries indulged and fostered this policy of domination, waste, corruption and mismanagement, the colonized and dominated populations fought unceasingly for access to democracy, the basis of all development.
 At last, near the end of 1990, the populations' cries of alarm were heard by the international community, which then quickly facilitated the third world's access to democracy.
 A new era dawned, starting in the East, where communism crumbled.
 The wind from the East blew through the African continent, where exhausted and traumatized populations accepted unprecedented sacrifices and waged a ruthless battle against the military regimes in power.
 The Central African people resolutely chose the latter path, at all cost.
 In this context, the Central African Republic, which I represent today at the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly, elected me President, Head of State of the Republic, in a setting of serenity and transparency, and over eight other candidates who enjoyed broad support from abroad.
 This was a victory not only for me and my Party but also for the entire Central African people.
 It was a victory won through change in favour of a new and truly democratic Republic.
 I would like to mention in particular France, the United States of America, Germany, Japan, the Republic of China in Taiwan, the European Union, the World Bank and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
 In this context, firmly convinced of the importance of humanitarian action in Rwanda, we supported unhesitatingly the helpful intervention of France, whose courage and determination we extol.
 That intervention curbed human suffering and restored peace to Rwanda.
 At its forty-ninth session the General Assembly must take concrete and urgent measures to prevent and contain conflicts by establishing and strengthening legal instruments.
 As to the Central African Republic, since my election on 27 September 1993, we have endeavoured to lay the groundwork for real democracy by giving priority to dialogue and concord between all the sectors of the Central African nation.
 A truly democratic constitution, which reflects the profound aspirations of my people, is being drafted and will soon be submitted to a referendum, in December 1994.
 This constitution, which is the result of a broad consensus, places great emphasis on justice, on fundamental freedoms, and on social and family well-being achieved through work.
 How will the Central African Republic, a land-locked country, accomplish such a programme if its neighbours, the countries of its subregion, are not at peace? A good portion of our exported and imported goods pass through neighbouring countries such as Cameroon and Congo.
 These zaraguinas are simply a reflection of the political and military situation of our neighbours.
 This is because peace in Chad, in Cameroon, in Congo, in Sudan and in Zaire will allow the Central African Republic to develop harmoniously, promoting a dynamic and fruitful policy of good-neighbourliness and of the complementarity we require.
 My country has embarked on the path of mediation between the parties in Chad because it believes in the virtues of dialogue and harmony in a spirit of tolerance and unity within a diversity of political opinions.
 The Government of Chad, on the initiative of the mediator, has just announced an amnesty for the combatants of the CSNPDT in order to rebuild confidence among all Chadians and to create conditions conducive to genuine reconciliation within Chad before the forthcoming elections in the country.
 I tell the truth, because the truth makes one free.
 Therefore, it is impossible to claim respect for human rights and for the rights of nations if, in one way or another, we promote discrimination for whatever reason.
 In the past, it was racial discrimination in South Africa.
 Today, we still see discrimination: between the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China in Taiwan.
 And yet, the Berlin Wall has fallen, as did the walls of Jericho in days gone by, marking the end of the East-West bloc system.
 The conflict between Israelis and Palestinians has yielded to coexistence between the State of Israel and the State of Palestine.
 The criminal foundations of apartheid have crumbled and given way to a new, democratic South Africa with a human face.
 For my part, and on behalf of the Central African Republic, I reaffirm that we intend to maintain diplomatic, economic, cultural and social relations with the two Chinese States without restriction.
 The same applies to the two Koreas, because we want to benefit from the technology of all these friendly countries for our development.
 Our Organization will soon celebrate its fiftieth anniversary.
 It is appropriate at this time to draw up the balance-sheet for this half-century and conduct a real assessment in order to set general policy guidelines for the years to come.
 He proposed regrouping States into political and economic entities, with a view to launching the economy of the African countries at the subregional and regional levels.
 Unfortunately, those ideas, which were put forward at such an early date by the late Barth\x{5e68}emy Boganda, were not well understood by his peers and therefore were systematically fought and discarded.
 Today, Africa has regressed.
 It is absent at the international level as regards trade and industrial and agro-industrial development.
 Why do our health-care systems no longer meet the aspirations of our populations? Why are our roads in such a state of disrepair that it is virtually impossible to travel freely from one country to another? In a word, why must we start all over?
 All this has happened because of different ideologies, based on the selfish interests of individual nations.
 It is also due to a lack of active solidarity among African nations.
 Contrary to other regions of the world, where there are clear signs of the resumption of economic growth, the persistence of poor economic results in Africa remains a source of concern and of constant disquiet.
 It is being crushed under the weight of debt, and various programmes for structural adjustment have done nothing to change the worsening standard of living of the entire continent, which does, however, have an enormous potential in its peoples and its nature.
 What we need to save the continent is a real Marshall Plan, because at the present time multilateral and bilateral assistance remain insufficient to promote sustained and lasting growth.
 Without this growth, which is necessary to raise the African people's standard of living, lasting peace can be only an illusion.
 In this context, my country expresses the hope that this session will mark a new stage in effective cooperation for progress and peace in the entire international community.
 The Central African Republic believes that tolerance and peace for development must henceforward be the motto of the United Nations.
 We hope that under your presidency the General Assembly will bring its work to a fruitful conclusion.
 Although the heart of our leader has ceased to beat, his great exploits will be remembered for ever.
 Our great leader Comrade Kim Il Sung will always be with us.
 Our dear leader Comrade Kim Jong Il remains committed to his life-long mission of carrying forward and accomplishing the revolutionary cause pioneered by our fatherly leader through generations and he is energetically leading the overall affairs of our party, State and armed forces.
 Our people will follow the wise leadership of Comrade Kim Jong Il, more firmly as they arm themselves with the Juche idea, the revolutionary idea of the respected leader Comrade Kim Il Sung, and defend, safeguard and glorify our socialism, which is their life and soul.
 The lifelong desire of the great leader Comrade Kim Il Sung was the reunification of our country, and he worked energetically until the last minute of his life for its realization.
 National reunification is the patriotic cause related to the destiny of our nation and it is the supreme task of our nation and one that can be delayed no longer.
 It is indeed an intolerable tragedy that the division of our nation that began in the 1940s has lasted until today, at a time when humanity is preparing to usher in the twenty-first century.
 The major stumbling-blocks to humanitarian exchanges, dialogue and contacts between the north and south are South Korea's so-called National Security Law, which defines fellow countrymen as enemies, and the concrete wall, a symbol of division and confrontation.
 All the legal and physical barriers must be removed at an early date if we are to achieve our consistent goals of free travel and contacts, cooperation and exchanges between the north and the south and if we are to realize national unity.
 An important point in defusing the tensions and bringing about peace on the Korean peninsula is to replace the Korean Armistice Agreement with a peace agreement and to establish a new peace arrangement to replace the current armistice mechanism.
 The Korean Armistice Agreement is a provisional step that envisages the suspension of any military actions between the belligerent parties and its subsequent conversion into a peace agreement.
 However, such a political conference has yet to be convened and the unstable armistice has lasted so far.
 Over the last four decades or so the Korean Armistice Agreement and the armistice mechanism have proved to be nominal and insubstantial, failing to prevent or restrain arms reinforcement from outside Korea, a military build-up and large-scale military exercises.
 Moreover, it is anomalous in every way that the Armistice Agreement signed in the 1950s should remain intact, even today when the cold war is over.
 These facts highlight the urgent need to replace the Armistice Agreement with a peace agreement and the existing armistice mechanism with a peace arrangement.
 In April this year the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea made a detailed proposal to the United States that the two countries should begin negotiations on an arrangement for a lasting peace to replace the outdated armistice system.
 It subsequently took the practical step of opening the representative office of the Korean People's Army in Panmunjom as our new negotiating body.
 These measures were taken as innovative, goodwill steps to make a breakthrough in establishing a new security arrangement on the Korean peninsula, taking into consideration the recognized international practices under which some countries terminated their belligerency after the Second World War and declared peaceful relationships.
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea still remains, in legal terms, in a state of belligerency with the United Nations, of which it is a dignified Member State. That is because the cease-fire has lasted so long.
 At its thirtieth session the General Assembly, in 1975, adopted resolution 3390 B (XXX), urging the dismantling of the United Nations Command and the replacement of the Armistice Agreement with a peace agreement, but that resolution has not yet been implemented.
 Another very important element in defusing tensions and establishing lasting peace on the Korean peninsula would be a fundamental resolution of the nuclear issue.
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has maintained its firm position that the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula should be resolved through dialogue and negotiations between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the United States.
 This shows that if the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the United States work together to resolve the issue with trust in each other, and on the principle of impartiality and equality, they will bring about a good and fruitful outcome.
 To demonstrate the transparency of our nuclear activities, we took the bold decision to replace the existing system of graphite-moderated reactors with a system of light water reactors, at the sacrifice of our independent atomic power industry.
 The Korean people are strongly independence-minded, and independence means life for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
 No threat or blackmail, no pressure or sanctions, will ever work on us.
 Our people will never beg for peace at the expense of our national dignity and sovereignty simply out of fear of war, and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea will never sell out its supreme interests under pressure.
 Intervention by any other party in their talks will only create difficulties and complications, and erect obstacles to the resolution of the issue, rather than help in its resolution in any way.
 Before the South Korean authorities talk about the nuclear issue, they should refrain from creating obstacles to the progress of the talks between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the United States, from encouraging confrontation between North and South and from aggravating the situation on the Korean peninsula.
 The world welcomes this process and looks forward to satisfactory results.
 The Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea will continue all its sincere efforts to resolve the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula and to achieve the region's denuclearization.
 Humankind now has the shared task of building a new, free and peaceful world, free from domination and subjugation.
 All United Nations Member States are equal Members of the United Nations, and all contribute jointly to world peace and security.
 Certain forces still try at international forums to trample international justice and the principle of impartiality underfoot.
 These phenomena still continue undiminished.
 This is a clear indication that there still remain outdated concepts and the mentality of the cold-war era, when the strong-arm actions and high-handed behaviour of a few countries were allowed to go unchallenged.
 Such unfair and unreasonable acts and behaviour should no longer be allowed any place in international relations.
 Restructuring of the United Nations is important, in order to meet more actively the changed reality and new challenges.
 It must first make a full and unambiguous apology, and provide compensation, for its past aggression and war crimes.
 This would be the proper behaviour for Japan.
 Disarmament nuclear disarmament in particular is another task that must be undertaken urgently.
 However, the nuclear-weapon States are reluctant to scrap their nuclear arsenals totally, even in the current post-cold-war era.
 They still seek to perpetuate their monopoly in nuclear weaponry and to justify legally the continued possession of these weapons.
 The extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is now a matter of worldwide interest and concern.
 The existing Treaty defines the rights and obligations of the nuclear-weapon States and of the non-nuclear-weapon States respectively on an unequal basis.
 These would be the first steps towards rendering meaningless the existence of nuclear weapons on our planet.
 It is indeed heartbreaking to see how national sovereignty is trampled underfoot and how regional conflicts and religious and ethnic conflicts continue unabated, only to escalate into wars.
 Social and economic development is an important matter directly related to international peace and security.
 It is common knowledge that social and economic development has been greatly hindered, and the worldwide phenomenon of the rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer is becoming even more intense.
 A fair and just international economic order should be established to free the people of the developing countries from famine, disease and disasters and to narrow the widening gap between the developed and the developing countries.
 We hope that the Agenda for Development proposed by the Secretary-General will make a substantial contribution to the economic development of these countries.
 The summits of non-aligned countries and other world conferences have emphasized the need for the establishment of a new, fair international order and have adopted resolutions calling for practical measures to this end.
 The developed countries should pay due attention to this matter.
 They should move to resume dialogue with the developing countries and to join in establishing a fair international economic order, and should refrain from any actions that would hinder the economic development of the developing countries.
 People in many countries are currently engaged in a vigorous struggle to reject all foreign domination and interference, to defend national independence and sovereignty and to achieve national stability and prosperity.
 We express our solidarity with the Cambodian people, whose cause is the promotion of national reconciliation and unity and the country's post-war rehabilitation.
 We fully support the peoples of the States members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations in their efforts to secure peace in their respective countries and common prosperity, and all other Asian peoples in their efforts to build a new, independent and prosperous Asia.
 We express our firm solidarity with the just cause of the Cuban people, who are resolutely defending the sovereignty of their country and the gains of socialism, and with the struggle of the Latin American peoples for peace and prosperity in their countries.
 You will no doubt be equal to the task, given your disposition and your record of distinguished service to your Government and country and to the international community.
 The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has continued to remain on top of his very challenging and delicate task as the chief executive of the Organization.
 His abilities and skills as a thinker, administrator and accomplished diplomat have been assets to the United Nations.
 In discharging its primary responsibility to promote international peace and security the United Nations has had successes and disappointments.
 Exploitation of the inherent weaknesses of the Charter, lack of good faith, greed and the quest for domination characterized the era of the cold war which, happily, appears to be coming to an end.
 However, conflicts that threaten international peace and security exist and are multiplying; some are legacies of the cold war and others the result of the failure of the international community to create the economic and social conditions for international peace and security.
 Thanks to the end of the cold war, the political landscape in Europe has changed and has impacted positively, if only with partial success, on Cambodia, Mozambique and, most important of all, the Middle East.
 At long last, UNITA is getting the message that the international community abhors its commitment to militarism and appreciates the political maturity and spirit of compromise of the Angolan Government.
 We take this opportunity to welcome its delegation into our midst.
 The contribution of the United Nations in the solution of these conflicts is immense, but one must also recognize that no progress would have been possible without the exemplary statesmanship of the leaders involved in their solution.
 To an increasing degree regional organizations and small States like Ghana are being called upon to bear the burden of securing a peaceful world, a burden far above their means.
 In such situations success depends largely upon support from the more endowed members of the international community, either through the United Nations or on a direct bilateral basis.
 In Liberia, Ghana and a few other countries members of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) are groaning under the burden of helping the Liberians maintain a nation.
 In Rwanda, in the heat of battle Ghana and Canada were left alone to grapple with a horror situation without adequate material support.
 Even after the international community was shamed into action, logistic support has not been particularly prompt or adequate.
 From the Congo crisis in the early 1960s up until now it has demonstrated the will and readiness to come to the help of nations in distress.
 We are willing to continue to discharge our responsibilities if adequate material support can be forthcoming from the international community, particularly, its wealthy members.
 With President Rawlings's assumption of the chairmanship of ECOWAS Ghana is directly face to face with the ambitions, rivalries, prejudices, misconceptions and lack of common purpose even within ECOWAS and with the misrepresentations that have made the solution of this problem elusive.
 We have taken note of the misconceptions and attempts to undermine this latest effort.
 However, with persistence, patience, firmness and transparency, we hope we can make significant progress in the coming year.
 What we ask of the Liberians is sincerity and the spirit of compromise.
 From the international community, we will appreciate moral, material and diplomatic support and an understanding of the complexities of the problem.
 Peace-keeping is crowding the international agenda to such a degree that we seem to be losing our ability to focus on the unfinished business of disarmament.
 The proliferation of conflicts generates insecurity and compounds the disarmament problem.
 Both problems, however, must be resolved simultaneously.
 The process of eliminating nuclear weapons needs to be speeded up to make the extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) an attractive proposition for non-nuclear Powers.
 It is no accident that conflicts abound in the developing world and the economically backward areas of Europe.
 At the root of all these conflict situations and the threats to peace and security are economic deprivation and abject poverty.
 It is not necessary to restate the gruesome statistics of the conditions of the poor the high mortality rates, the malnutrition, the inadequate health facilities, ignorance and poor housing.
 These conditions are compounded by a seriously inequitable system of international trade with its attendant problems, including the debt burden.
 The vast majority of lower-income countries which owe debts totalling $1.3 trillion are in sub-Saharan Africa.
 Sub-saharan Africa alone is overburdened with debt servicing to the tune of $200 billion representing 10 per cent of the total national income of the 43 countries involved.
 It is not sheer coincidence that Africa plays host to a sizeable number of United Nations peace-keeping operations.
 The international accord embodied in the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa, which contains a strategy to relaunch African economies on the path of growth and recovery, has hardly had any noticeable effect a year after its adoption.
 The international community is yet to discharge its obligations under the international accord.
 No agreement has been reached on the modalities for the creation of a diversification fund for Africa as called for by the various studies initiated by well-known bodies of the United Nations.
 The conclusion of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations was no doubt a historic achievement.
 It holds prospects of opening up possibilities of trade liberalization and long-term growth.
 However, it should not be an occasion for an attempt to impose a set of social values on the international community, nor should it be an opportunity to malign the cultural practices of any group of people.
 It should be an occasion for mutual understanding to pave the way for a charter for social progress.
 We recognize the increasingly evident correlation between the advancement of women and economic development and social stability.
 We hope the Conference will help accelerate the removal of obstacles to women's full and equal participation in all spheres of life and enable them to play an active role in the global restructuring of economic, political, social and cultural relations as we approach the twenty-first century.
 In this exercise we must keep two things in mind.
 We must not undermine the validity of the basic principles of the Organization, such as the sovereign equality of States and non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States.
 Not even the current preoccupation with democracy and human rights should be allowed to erode these principles any more than is absolutely essential.
 We must fight neo-colonialist tendencies exemplified in the economic blockade of Cuba and the questionable imposition of sanctions against the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
 There is no basis in international law for these actions, which result in misery for the ordinary people of these countries and restrain intercourse between nations.
 Reasonable proposals for an end to these problems have been made which we hope will find general acceptance.
 In response to the proposal contained in the Secretary-General's report, An Agenda for Peace, the General Assembly and the Security Council have adopted a number of measures and decisions which should enhance the Organization's ability to maintain international peace and security.
 We hope that by its fiftieth anniversary the United Nations will be sufficiently reformed and revitalized to command universal respect and cooperation.
 In the final analysis, however, resources financial and otherwise will determine the effectiveness of the Organization.
 The financial situation of the Organization remains a source of concern.
 Members of the Organization should redouble their efforts to ensure its solvency so that the Secretary-General can effectively implement the mandates of the legislative bodies.
 The Members, for their part, expect prudence and discipline in the application of the resources made available to the Organization.
 The consolidation of the internal oversight mechanisms into the Office of Internal Oversight Services, together with the existing external oversight mechanisms, should help reduce waste and ensure accountability.
 Since his election our Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has placed all his courage, energy and determination at the service of our Organization to promote peace, justice and progress in an increasingly difficult climate.
 Cameroon would once again like to assure him of its firm and constant support.
 The emergence of a united, democratic and non-racial South Africa, under the leadership of President Nelson Mandela, has sounded the death knell of the apartheid era, now a thing of the past, while marking the advent of a new era on our continent.
 We must encourage this promising, but still fragile, development and give it all the necessary attention and determination.
 It is an established fact that, like non-aggression pacts and mutual assistance pacts, preventive diplomacy is an interesting innovation and one that may well prevent new conflicts and suffering, and even reverse the tendency towards confrontation and war which is so characteristic of our continent.
 For this reason, preventive diplomacy should be encouraged and supported by the international community.
 The positive developments in South Africa and the Middle East coincide, unfortunately, with the persistence or the eruption of hotbeds of tension throughout the world.
 In Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Cyprus, in Afghanistan, as well as in Cambodia, peace is still threatened.
 It is threatened even further on our continent, a fact to which the tragedy of Rwanda bears witness.
 The persistence of these conflicts and hotbeds of tension, so harmful in their consequences, compels us to initiate and resolutely and vigorously pursue any action conducive to peace, security and the building of confidence, which are so necessary in the struggle against poverty and destitution.
 Within States we should, for instance, promote tolerance, respect for the rights of others, participation by all in the affairs of the country, and fair distribution of the fruits of growth.
 In relations between States, the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States must be respected, while at the same time this should not be an obstacle to mutual cooperation in the event of natural disasters and calamities that require humanitarian intervention.
 Although at the outset this machinery has already achieved some excellent results, nevertheless, like the Standing Consultative Committee on Questions of Security in Central Africa that was created by the Secretary-General of the United Nations in the context of preventive diplomacy, it needs the support of the international community.
 In the final analysis, these regional initiatives to promote confidence-building measures and progressive disarmament should, on the global level, be encouraged in order to achieve the objectives of the international community with respect to disarmament, peace and security.
 Thus, we welcome the respect being shown for the moratorium on nuclear testing, as well as the progress achieved in negotiations between the United States and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea over the North Korean nuclear programme.
 Regarding the current negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament to conclude a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty, Cameroon joins the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in expressing the hope that this convention will be signed before the Amendment Conference in 1995.
 Finally, whether we speak of nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass destruction, conventional weapons, toxic waste, mine clearance or anti-personnel mines, Cameroon also wishes to see the international community working towards general and complete disarmament.
 In his report entitled Agenda for Development (A/48/935), the Secretary-General noted very aptly that peace was the foundation of development; that the economy was the engine of progress; that the environment was the basis of sustainability; that justice was the pillar of society, and that democracy represented good governance.
 It reaffirms, furthermore, that economic, social and cultural development is a fundamental right of the human being.
 The urgent need to set in motion a new United Nations programme for the development of Africa in the 1990s should be stressed.
 The timeliness and relevance of such a step was reaffirmed by the international conference on the development of Africa held in Tokyo.
 Any strategy for the sustainable development of the continent must consequently take into account the need for diversification.
 In a different context and this cannot be repeated too often debt is a major obstacle to development.
 The debt of developing countries has steadily increased, rising from $1.662 billion in 1992 to $1.770 billion in 1993.
 We welcome the efforts made so far to relieve or reschedule debt for developing countries.
 Drought and desertification are another subject of major concern.
 We welcome the fact that negotiations were successfully concluded last June in Paris to draw up an international convention on drought and desertification, a matter of undoubted importance for the world ecosystem and, more specifically, for the implementation of Agenda 21 in Africa.
 Human rights are universal and indivisible, and we must therefore attach equal importance to economic, political, cultural and social rights.
 Whether in terms of the rights of women, children, youth, the disabled, the aged or other vulnerable groups, the human being must remain the central focus of the international community's concerns.
 We should welcome the Plan of Action adopted at the recent International Conference on Population and Development, held at Cairo, for it takes account of that requirement.
 The Plan of Action does not focus on mankind as an abstract entity, but on human beings rooted in their economic, social, cultural and religious diversities, all of which need to be kept in mind.
 That is why the forthcoming Copenhagen World Summit on Social Development ought to result in specific commitments to reduce poverty, to create productive jobs and to strengthen social integration, particularly among the most vulnerable strata of society.
 The same concerns are reflected in the importance we attach to the Fourth World Conference on Women, to be held at Beijing in 1995.
 It is in the interest of us all to pursue collective, unified action to struggle against the harmful effects of drugs, the spread of the AIDS pandemic, and natural catastrophes, if necessary combining emergency humanitarian assistance with measures for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the stricken countries.
 In another area, the entry into force next November of the Montego Bay convention the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea next November is a particularly encouraging development setting the seal on the universality of that important legal instrument.
 Your excellent qualifications, extensive experience, wisdom and detailed knowledge of international affairs, give us confidence in that you will guide the deliberations at this session to successful conclusions.
 I should like to take this opportunity also to express our gratitude and appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Samuel Insanally, for the important role he played in the forty-eighth session and for his tireless activity throughout it.
 Foremost among those is the maintenance of peace and security on the basis of justice and equality.
 It is our hope that he will continue to play his role with the same enthusiasm and high-mindedness.
 Having studied the annual report on the work of the Organization, which we have all received, we can say it is comprehensive and accurate.
 The Secretary-General deserves our gratitude and appreciation for the outstanding effort he has put into drawing up that report, and in presenting it in such a satisfactory form.
 First, I should like to point out that history shows that throughout the ages our country, Yemen, has always been a single political unit, with the exception of a few periods of varying lengths during which it was subjected to division or segmentation.
 Sometimes this was the result of a power struggle, and sometimes the result of total or partial occupation by one or more foreign powers.
 However, it was never long before Yemen regained its unity at the hands of its own people, who never lost sight of the fact that they are a single Muslim, Arab, Yemeni people, and never forgot for one moment that they belonged to one nation.
 Throughout the earlier decades of this century, wherein our people struggled against the dictatorial rule of the Imam in the North and British colonialism in the South, the unity of Yemen was the loftiest ideal of our people and its dearest national aspiration.
 Our people never accepted that the separation should continue once its national soil had been liberated from the yoke of occupation.
 They persisted in refusing to accept that abnormal situation and in resisting it by every means.
 Each of the two former Yemeni States adopted a name which emphasized the fact that it belonged to one State called Yemen.
 Their rejection of partition led each of those States to refer to the other as its other half.
 Mr. Sucharipa (Austria), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 This led to two outbreaks of hostilities between the two parts, the first in 1972 and the second in 1979 and, throughout, tension and conflict between them persisted and continued to flare up from time to time.
 Another factor was that the regime in the South, which had been tightly linked to the Soviet Union and its socialist-country allies, found itself unable to oppose internal and external enemies without strong international backing.
 On 22 May 1990 unity was peacefully and voluntarily established in the form of a single State called the Republic of Yemen, a Republic based on democracy and pluralism.
 a true revolution in the furthest part of the Southern Arabian peninsula.
 This was inspired by a genuine desire to strengthen the bonds of national consensus, to guarantee secure foundations and support for the successful establishment of national unity, particularly in its early stages, and to guarantee continuity and survival for a democratic experiment which was still in its cradle.
 They also aimed at preventing conspirators and opportunists from having any leeway to exacerbate disagreements or provoke armed conflict.
 Only a few weeks after the formation of the coalition Government, on 31 May of that year, while the freely and directly elected Parliament was preparing to carry out its work and discharge its duties, there began to appear certain indications that a suspect plot was being hatched.
 It was clear that elements of the leadership of the partner in the governing coalition, the Socialist Party, who held important positions in the constitutional institutions and, more precisely, in the Presidential Council and the Cabinet of Ministers, were behind the plan.
 Those conspiring elements were not satisfied with that, despite the grave risks involved.
 Those forces were able to turn the fighting decisively in favour of unity and democracy, and by so doing were able to abort the suspect plot and to maintain Yemen as the unified single State it has been throughout its long history.
 Today, Yemen has regained its stability and ensured its security, after that ordeal, and has put an end to sedition.
 Those who fell prey to deceit and disinformation have returned to the nation to participate in political life, and they benefit from the spirit of tolerance which characterizes the political leadership of President Ali Abdullah Saleh.
 Most of them have gone back to their normal lives quite naturally.
 That was not all: the Socialist Party itself spontaneously elected a new leadership which contained many elements of the former leadership, and went back to participating in political activity in complete freedom.
 Its representatives in parliament participate in parliamentary life just as they did before.
 They also decided to create a consultative council to be established by republican decree from experienced and highly qualified personalities from various regions of Yemen to widen and expand the basis of representation and opinion.
 Our choice of the democratic option based on political and party pluralism was not the result of pressure from any side, rather it was motivated by our conviction that democracy is the best contemporary method of government.
 It represents the path leading to development, progress, security and stability.
 However, the continued success of our democratic experiment remains subject to economic growth.
 This is a war which takes many different forms, including the closing of markets in other countries of the region to our agricultural and industrial products.
 The suffering of the Iraqi people has reached intolerable levels.
 Insistence on maintaining such measures will lead to deepening enmity and hatred between the States of the region.
 We cannot forget our beloved brotherly Sudan.
 The fact that our sister country Somalia remains in the grip of fragmentation, anarchy and fighting, is deeply distressing to us and makes our hearts bleed.
 It is also a cause of deep sorrow that the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a target of terrible aggression and continuous shelling by the Serb aggressors, while the world does nothing but make statements and threaten to take measures which have yet to materialize.
 We would like to express our happiness at seeing this new African State among us.
 May we wish him all success and progress in leading his country, particularly after leading his people a phase of struggle with courage, resistance and steadfastness.
 We therefore believe that we should all stand against any attempt to distort the concept and image of Islam and against any allegations against it because Islam is a religion which rejects violence and terrorism, a religion that calls for love, coexistence and peace.
 In order to show its respect and appreciation for the United Nations, the Republic of Yemen has formed a national committee to organize celebrations for the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of this international Organization.
 We want our celebrations on this occasion to reflect the importance we attach to it.
 One of the most important of these is the emergence of two major economic powers - Japan and Germany.
 There should also be just, permanent representation of regional groupings, including the Arab region.
 The President: I now call on the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone, His Excellency Mr. Abass Chernor Bundu.
 Mr. Bundu (Sierra Leone): It is with great pleasure that I congratulate Mr. Amara Essy on his election to the presidency of the current session of the General Assembly.
 His leadership of the Assembly confers dignity on Africa, on West Africa and on his country, Ce d'Ivoire, with which Sierra Leone happily enjoys excellent bilateral relations and shares a common West African identity.
 To Ambassador Insanally of Guyana, his immediate predecessor, I convey my delegation's gratitude and appreciation for the commendable manner in which he performed his duties as President of the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
 The approach adopted by the Secretary-General of our Organization since he assumed office has been exemplary in many ways.
 He deserves high tribute for his untiring efforts over the past two years, especially in the realms of the maintenance of international peace and security and the promotion of development.
 These are among the major challenges of our time.
 Developmental and political issues now occupy a larger part of our global, regional and national agendas, and the past 12 months have been no exception.
 In some cases, these developments have been a source of joy and satisfaction; in others, the stigma of shame and disgrace has loomed larger.
 The persistence of these problems could easily undermine the stability of the world economy and pose serious threats to international peace and security.
 Immeasurable work has been done to redress the economic stranglehold in which most of our countries find themselves.
 The situation is even more acute for my country, which is in the throes of a rebel war and implementing a substantial economic reform programme as well as a political transition programme all three activities taking place simultaneously.
 Hardly any other State member of the Assembly shares this unique experience.
 Poverty and the decreasing living standards of the majority of our people are at the heart of our problems.
 To alleviate these problems, my Government has embarked on courageous, wide-ranging and far-reaching socio-economic reforms, including the deregulation of prices and exchange and interest rates, and the reduction of fiscal deficit.
 The pace and scope of these reforms, however, contrast sharply with the very modest results achieved so far.
 Those are just some of the difficult tasks ahead.
 They are made no less formidable by the new challenges posed by the Uruguay Round agreements signed at Marrakesh last April.
 My Government welcomes the new agreements, but would stress the need for continued evaluation of their implementation to ensure expansion of world trade for all countries, improved market access and adequate protection of the interests of the least developed countries in particular.
 Any attempt, therefore, to impose new conditionalities, encompassing environmental and labour conditionalities in this context, must be strongly resisted.
 In the meantime, the observation is inescapable that the Marrakesh agreements pose a real danger to trade preferences previously assured developing countries; this can lead to a loss in export market share and export earnings.
 A permanent and comprehensive solution must therefore be found without further delay.
 That high-level meeting on the debt crisis of developing countries, which I attended together with Ministers from twenty-five heavily debt-distressed, least-developed countries, endorsed a number of general principles for debt reduction, which represent a significant step in the search for a lasting solution to the debt problem.
 In Africa, for example, we have accepted that the key to sustainable development is in the hands of Africans themselves.
 The African leadership must therefore demonstrate a determination to stay the course of appropriate economic reforms and improvement in governance.
 The issues I have raised will no doubt be on the agendas of certain conferences slated for the coming year.
 The situation of women and the need to integrate them better in the development process as agents and beneficiaries of development will also receive attention at the Fourth World Conference on Women, to be convened at Beijing in September next year.
 This Assembly, for its part, is convening a high-level intergovernmental meeting to conduct a mid-term global review of progress in the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries in the 1990s.
 It provides us with another historic opportunity to address the root causes of poverty and underdevelopment of the developing countries in a holistic and comprehensive manner.
 We urge the Secretary -General to make concrete, action-oriented recommendations for the enhancement of the socio-economic conditions of these countries and to suggest practical measures for their implementation.
 True, some progress has been recorded since that Conference.
 We in the developing world are committed to implementing Agenda 21, but this commitment will remain illusory unless it is complemented by adequate human, financial and technical resources.
 On the world political scene too, the picture that we see concurrently inspires hope and engenders desperation.
 Without a doubt, the holding of the first pluralistic, non-racial, democratic elections in South Africa, in April this year, and the subsequent installation of a Government of national unity, marked a major achievement not only for the people of South Africa but also for this Organization.
 The patient and dedicated struggle of all peace-loving South Africans to resolve peacefully the abominable policy of apartheid, aided by the committed solidarity of the world at large, has been amply rewarded.
 In taking this opportunity, on behalf of the Government and the people of Sierra Leone, formally to welcome South Africa back into this world Assembly, I wish to reiterate our commitment to work together with the new Government to make our continent a better place for all of us.
 The presence of the South African delegation here today is a confirmation of man's ability to rise above those conditions that threaten his survival and to resolve them peacefully, though they may have originally appeared insurmountable.
 Yet, with that policy's banishment from the South African landscape, this Organization should now rekindle its sense of purpose to continue the struggle against racial discrimination and segregation wherever they exist.
 Secondly, the attainment by South Africa of democratic values under a non-racial Government of national unity should demonstrate to all countries, especially in Africa, that excuses for denying a similar transformation to our own societies are now untenable.
 We have come to understand and appreciate from this exemplary South African political experience that, where democratic principles are applied in full in the governance of any nation, there is every likelihood that solutions will be found to the political problems of that nation, however intractable they may appear.
 Conscious of this fact, the Government of the National Provisional Ruling Council of Sierra Leone, headed by His Excellency Captain Valentine Strasser, has unveiled a political reform programme that will ensure the installation of a democratically elected government in our country by January 1996.
 With that in view, an Interim National Electoral Commission of eminent citizens has now been constituted, headed by Mr. James Jonah, former Under-Secretary-General of this Organization.
 Furthermore, as a result of extensive debates on an initial Working Document put together by a National Advisory Council, the draft constitution has now been finalized and will soon be presented to the people for final approval.
 Meanwhile, a National Commission on Democracy, which will undertake a programme of mass education to let the people appreciate the values of democracy and their rights and duties as citizens, will soon be appointed.
 Let me assure this Assembly that the Government of the National Provisional Ruling Council remains fully committed to the transition programme, which continues to be on course.
 We look forward to the cooperation and assistance of the international community in enabling us to realize the programme's objectives.
 Allow me at this point to recall the adoption by the General Assembly last year of resolution 48/196, entitled International assistance to Sierra Leone, and our continued expectation for the full implementation of its provisions.
 Further, the untold devastation of the country's economically productive areas continues to undermine an already fragile economy.
 We remain amenable to any option, military or non-military, that will secure a speedy conclusion to this untenable situation, thus ensuring the creation of an environment conducive to the holding of the elections anticipated in our transition programme.
 The success of these undertakings and of others in my Government's transition programme depends largely on the progress that is made in restoring peace to Liberia, hence our deep concern about developments taking place across our border.
 It is in this connection that we renew our commitment to the Cotonou accords and reiterate that they contain the essential elements for the resolution of the Liberian conflict, namely the disarmament of the warring factions, leading to the holding of elections.
 Drawing from the experience in Angola, it is clear that without such disarmament, peace in Liberia will be tenuous at best.
 We therefore call on the United Nations and the international community to support the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) financially, logistically and otherwise in order to reinvigorate the peace process and ensure that disarmament gains renewed momentum.
 Given our own refugee situation, we are gravely concerned about the increasing flows in the world refugee population, about half of whom are children, whose needs should be met through appropriate measures of protection and assistance.
 This International Year of the Family therefore provides an excellent opportunity to focus attention on the essential needs of refugee children.
 As crucial as these measures are for mitigating the global refugee problem, we remain convinced that, unless and until the international community overcomes the scourge of poverty and political strife, this problem will remain constantly with us.
 It is our fervent hope, therefore, that a renewed impetus will once again be found to prevent and eradicate this condition of boundless human misery.
 Looking beyond the borders of our region, Sierra Leone acknowledges the signing of the Washington Declaration by Israel and Jordan, ending the state of war between the two countries.
 In this connection, my Government would like to commend the role of the United States and Egypt for their relentless efforts in bringing together Israel and its Arab neighbours.
 We would also hope that in other areas, such as Somalia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, there will be progress in bringing to an end the present unacceptable stalemate.
 While the absence of progress may be frustrating, we nevertheless believe that it would be a tragic mistake even to contemplate disengagement from peace-keeping operations in Africa at this crucial stage.
 We will not readily forget those graphic images of death, abject misery and destruction, or soon overcome the torment and challenges that our collective conscience has had to face.
 That such a tragedy occurred at all points to the failure of existing international mechanisms for responding to such devastating situations.
 We were accused of harbouring ulterior motives against that country and of encouraging intervention.
 We believe that in the realm of maintaining regional peace and security, regional arrangements have an important role to play, as envisaged in Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.
 This has been recognized by the exemplary collaboration between the United Nations and ECOWAS on the Liberian situation.
 We are therefore deeply encouraged by the positive resonance of some members of the Security Council in that connection.
 We must at this point applaud the action of the French Government in Rwanda at a time when this Organization seemed completely paralysed.
 We believe that the French action, which undoubtedly brought a glimmer of hope to a situation that was palpably so catastrophic and which prevented a second Goma, is worthy of special mention by all peace-loving nations.
 We also call upon the present Rwandan Government to continue to take all measures necessary to restore peace and reconciliation to their country.
 Though we must all learn the painful lessons of the Rwandan experience, it is essential that those who played a part any part at all in visiting such horror on the people of Rwanda be held fully accountable for their crimes.
 In this connection, my delegation fully supports the establishment of a special tribunal to bring to justice those responsible for what can only be described as genocide.
 We expect that the Commission of Experts will continue to collect all available evidence to make for a speedy conclusion of this shameful episode.
 The international community has an obligation to ensure that such callous indifference to human life and the deliberate commission of acts of atrocity, wherever they occur, do not go unpunished.
 The time has come for a strong message to be sent to all who may presume that no consequences will follow from such despicable behaviour simply because it takes place behind national borders.
 I wish to declare here and now that my Government recognizes that no true governance can endure if people are separated from and denied the full enjoyment of their freedoms and liberties.
 Stemming from this recognition, therefore, my Government has embarked on the major task of ratifying, as soon as possible, the remaining-human rights instruments to which Sierra Leone is not yet a party, thus guaranteeing within our domestic law their application to all Sierra Leoneans.
 The continuation of this conflict, which has cost the lives of countless thousands of peaceful Angolans, remains a source of pain and anguish to my Government.
 Although not much optimism has been evinced, there seems to be some progress in the Lusaka peace talks.
 With the acceptance by both the Angolan Government and UNITA of the comprehensive package put forward by the Secretary-General's representative, there is now renewed hope that the talks will soon yield the desired result of a durable solution.
 Africans everywhere, I am sure, will give their blessing as Mozambique embarks on the path to durable peace and reconciliation.
 Back then, passions were inflamed by those who argued falsely that the presence of so-called foreigners was injurious to the economic well-being of the State.
 To many of us it seems that the socio-economic well-being of our world is under siege from conflicts in many lands, far and near.
 Yet, recent experience has shown that this is not always the best option.
 My delegation maintains the view that the Organization would be better served by committing the greater part of its scarce resources to socio-economic development activities and preventive diplomacy.
 Many questions will continue to be asked about the direction that the United Nations must pursue as its fiftieth anniversary dawns.
 In many ways, we are convinced that the growing incidence of political instability worldwide is a strong advocate of a more efficient, transparent and democratic Security Council a Council cultivating a culture that frowns upon a few seeking always to wield dominion over the rest.
 Over the years, we have striven together to find solutions to a wide range of problems whose impact can no longer be localized.
 If our journey through the decades has taught us anything, it is that blinding ourselves to the realities of our time, turning away from them, avoiding involvement or seeking solace in inaction provides only momentary consolation or comfort.
 No longer is poverty merely the affliction of a distant cousin in a far-off land, nor can we successfully shield ourselves from the trials and tribulations of those who may be less fortunate than we are.
 The lesson to be learnt from all this is that, as human beings, we have a fate inextricably interwoven, whether we like it or not.
 Let us now give that vision the focus and direction of a better tomorrow.
 Mr. Seniloli (Fiji): On behalf of the Government and the people of Fiji, I warmly congratulate His Excellency Mr. Amara Essy of Ce d'Ivoire on his election as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Given his vast experience and his knowledge of the United Nations system, I have every confidence that the current session of the Assembly will complete its work successfully.
 Most of the problems afflicting the world community that have been discussed in this Assembly in previous years continue unchanged.
 Moreover, our efforts are invariably made after an event has occurred, and often when our conscience cannot bear to see the misery on our television screens.
 We must devise ways for a more preventive approach to the problems.
 Political problems are often a consequence of economic and social problems.
 The General Assembly's decision at its forty-seventh session to convene a World Summit for Social Development at Copenhagen early in 1995 was very timely.
 We can no longer turn a blind eye to the increasing growth of poverty and unemployment and the attendant marginalization of peoples.
 Annually, between 13 to 18 million people die from starvation, disease and famine.
 It has been estimated that world wide one out of every five people live below the poverty line.
 While Governments, in many cases, equivocate on how to solve this problem, the poor increasingly look to the United Nations to find effective, immediate and practical solutions.
 To ignore this reality is to deny that it constitutes a real source of political instability.
 Peace, to have meaning for many who have known only suffering in both peace and war, must be translated into bread or rice, shelter, health and education, as well as freedom and human dignity a steadily better life.
 If peace is to be secure, long-suffering and long-starved peoples of the world, the underprivileged and the undernourished, must begin to realize without delay the promise of a new day and a new life.
 While these words were uttered in a different context, I would suggest that they encapsulate the whole reason for the social Summit.
 My Government will actively support and work in cooperation with other countries to achieve the objectives of the World Summit for Social Development.
 My Government looks forward to playing an active role in the forthcoming World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing next September.
 Fiji has always recognized the important contribution of women to society and to the development process in general.
 A Department on Women and Culture, which operates under the purview of this Ministry, carries the responsibility of monitoring improvements in the status of women.
 It seeks to encourage the private and public sectors to address the needs of women in their policies and programmes.
 It is also the Government's policy to assign 50 per cent of representation in training, appointments and promotions at all levels of the civil service to women, on the basis of preference and merit.
 Fiji will also explore membership of the Commission on the Status of Women, in keeping with its policy of strengthening the role of women in the country's national development plans.
 In short, the Conference was convened because of a universal recognition of the problems faced by small island developing States in achieving sustainable development goals.
 While the Barbados Conference was important in re-emphasizing the special environmental and economic circumstances of small island States, my delegation wishes to reiterate that the Conference was only the beginning of a process.
 We must now act to implement the Barbados Programme of Action and Declaration.
 In this connection, we would urge the international community, and particularly those countries with developed and industrialized economies, to respond to the invitation to enhance and promote human resource development programmes in small island developing countries.
 Increased technical assistance will enhance the institutional and administrative capacity of small island countries to implement the Programme of Action.
 One of the ways in which this can be brought about is by the provision of new and additional financial resources in accordance with Chapter 33 of Agenda 21.
 Unless creative and supportive international responses to the special challenges faced by small island developing countries in planning for sustainable development are urgently stimulated, I fear that their continuing vulnerability to both physical and socio-economic forces will increase.
 My country strongly supports the principles contained in the Charter and I would like to reaffirm our support for the Organization.
 Over the past 50 years, the Organization has seen many changes.
 With the end of the cold war, it has assumed a more central role in world affairs.
 There is an ever-increasing demand on the limited resources of the Organization and, in particular, on its Secretariat.
 We support the Secretariat and commend the adjustments it is making in order to respond to the changing needs of the international community.
 In this regard, my Government welcomes the creation of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
 We believe this to be an important innovation that will contribute to greater efficiency within the United Nations system.
 We fully support the continuing efforts to bring about greater transparency and accountability on the part of the United Nations management and institutional structures.
 In the same vein, Mr. President, my Government supports the view that it is now time that the current structure and the membership of the Security Council were reviewed.
 In the event that membership of the Security Council is expanded, Fiji fully supports the membership of Japan, recognizing its important role not only as a valued neighbour in the Asia-Pacific region, but also as a key player in the global economy.
 We have seen their courage in Cambodia, Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia and other places around the world.
 At its last session, the Ad Hoc Committee worked very constructively and made significant progress.
 We have a very real interest in the conclusion of this convention since in as much as Fiji has lost some of its nationals in various peace-keeping operations, and many others have been injured.
 It involves the sacrifices, not only of individuals, but also of the families left behind.
 But my Government remains unshaken in its belief that the price we have paid and are continuing to pay for our involvement in United Nations peace-keeping operations would have been worthwhile if we have contributed towards making the world a safer place.
 At the present time, there are at least l,000 troops from Fiji serving in various peace-keeping operations - in Lebanon, Sinai, Iraq, Kuwait and Rwanda.
 Only recently we agreed to participate in the regional peace-keeping force in Bougainville in Papua New Guinea.
 Our participation in the South Pacific regional peace-keeping force for Bougainville is in concert with our other neighbours in the South Pacific, namely Tonga, Vanuatu, Solomon Islands, Australia and New Zealand.
 Let me say that our commitment to peace-keeping is a continuing affirmation of our belief that the purposes and principles set forth in the United Nations Charter must be given practical expression.
 Fiji, as a responsible member of the international community, will continue to play its role in the enhancement of global peace and security.
 On the subject of peace-keeping, I want at this time to express my Government's satisfaction at the strengthening of the Department of Peace-keeping Operations.
 I believe that continued innovations in the institutional structure of this Department will be necessary if it is to play a meaningful and effective role in support of United Nations peace-keeping activities.
 We are therefore pleased that, 12 years after its adoption, the Convention will enter into force on 16 November 1994.
 The Convention represents a historic achievement by the international community.
 Like many other States, Fiji has already been implementing the provisions of the Convention, through its Marine Spaces Act.
 As at the Conference on the Law of the Sea, our delegation, together with other delegations, was pleased to play an active and constructive role in bringing about that important agreement.
 We have signed the agreement and will become a party to it.
 Fish is an invaluable gift of nature to man.
 Fish is an important national and regional resource and it is a staple in our diet.
 We are therefore concerned at the long-term impact on these resources and on the marine ecosystem as a whole, if the current practice of uncontrolled fishing, especially on the high seas, continues.
 Fiji therefore strongly supports an effective outcome from the Conference, an outcome that would ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable use of the fish resources of the seas and oceans.
 Our delegation, in cooperation with other delegations to the Conference, will spare no effort in working towards this goal.
 Since the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly, we have witnessed positive and constructive developments in the Middle East peace process.
 It is almost a year now since the Declaration of Principles was signed between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
 The recent peace accord between Israel and Jordan, which was signed at Washington last July, was another very positive development.
 In particular, we express the hope that the ongoing bilateral negotiations between Israel and Jordan and between Israel and the Palestinians will continue.
 We are also hopeful that the present dialogue between Syria, Lebanon and Israel will eventually lead to further agreements.
 One is New Caledonia.
 In this connection, my Government will continue to observe developments in New Caledonia with keen interest in the build-up to the referendum to be held in 1998.
 Fiji has long been a consistent opponent of nuclear testing anywhere and in any environment.
 Our opposition to such testing is by no means based only on environmental concerns.
 For hundreds of years, the livelihood of our people has depended on their limited land and on the resources in the marine environment.
 Fundamentally, our abhorrence of nuclear arms and nuclear testing is based on the belief that there is simply no place for nuclear weapons in our region, or indeed in any other part of the world.
 The Pacific region has long recognized and embraced the principles enshrined in the Treaty, and these principles are now reflected in the Treaty of Rarotonga, which establishes the South Pacific as a nuclear-free zone.
 For obvious reasons, we object very strongly to this development and earnestly hope that there will be no more such shipments through the region.
 The convention is expected to be adopted in mid-1995.
 This will further strengthen our resolve to keep the South Pacific region free of radioactive and hazardous wastes.
 At the national level, the Government of Fiji has commenced work on the review of the country's 1990 Constitution.
 They have been drawn from both sides of the House of Representatives and from the Senate, and represent all the racial groups in our population.
 Last November, the Cabinet agreed to the timetable for the review of the Constitution, following the approval, by Parliament, of the terms of reference of the Constitution Review Commission.
 We are less able to absorb adverse trends in external economic conditions than are larger and more diversified economies; equally, an improvement in the global economy is slow to be reflected in our own small economy.
 Like many small developing countries, we are still in the process of gradual recovery following a prolonged downturn that afflicted the world as a whole.
 Like many countries, we have had to adjust our economic policies in such a way as to give them a more market-oriented approach.
 These constitute a package of mutually self-reinforcing policies.
 Our internal efforts to create a better economic climate, if not supported by external investments, will not succeed.
 Nor will they succeed if we are denied or prevented from getting access to markets of more developed countries.
 Our efforts, therefore, depend considerably on investment from outside and on access for our products to traditional and new markets.
 In this regard, we express our gratitude to our developed neighbouring countries for the consideration they have given to some of our exports.
 We believe, however, that in the spirit of regional cooperation and better balance in trade the present arrangements must be further improved.
 In our efforts to develop our economy, we also count on the support and understanding of our good friends and partners in our neighbouring region of Asia.
 We value our increasing contacts and economic relations, particularly with the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, Malaysia, the People's Republic of China, the Republic of Korea and Taiwan, and we are confident that these relations will continue to be strengthened in the future.
 Fiji remains committed to its official relations with the People's Republic of China but also greatly values its trade and economic cooperation with Taiwan.
 It is our sincere hope that the People's Republic of China and Taiwan, in continued direct talks and negotiations, will be able to reach agreement on a practicable basis on which to strengthen and expand cooperation between them, including cooperation in the international arena.
 The establishment of the South Pacific Forum in 1971 was an early initiative taken by Fiji following its independence, together with Australia, the Cook Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Tonga and Western Samoa.
 The Forum now has 15 members, and it meets at the level of Heads of Government.
 The Forum originated from the desire of our leaders to develop collective responses on a wide range of regional issues, including trade, economic development, civil aviation, maritime, telecommunications, energy, environmental, and political and security matters.
 One significant recent development is the post-Forum dialogue: immediately after a Forum meeting, the Forum island countries meet separately with their more developed trade and economic partners to discuss development priorities and constraints in the region.
 The post-Forum dialogue partners include Canada, the People's Republic of China, France, Japan, Taiwan, the United Kingdom and the United States.
 In a wider context, we of the South Pacific Forum believe that it is important and indeed mutually beneficial for the Forum Secretariat to be more closely associated with the United Nations.
 For this reason, the Forum members have decided to seek Observer status in this Organization for the South Pacific Forum Secretariat.
 We urge the General Assembly to give favourable consideration to this request.
 In these times, when valuable resources for development purposes are becoming more and more scarce and difficult to come by, I wish to assure the donors and agencies that my Government will manage and utilize these scarce resources carefully and effectively.
 The President: I shall now call on those representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
 May I remind members that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
 Mr. Zacharakis (Greece): My delegation feels obliged, in exercise of its right of reply, to respond to the inflammatory statement made yesterday by the Foreign Minister of Albania.
 Greece was the first country to support Albania in every possible way in its process of democratization and economic development.
 Regrettably, the amicable and supportive attitude shown by Greece has not been reciprocated by the present regime in Albania.
 However, little has changed: fundamental human rights, especially in the areas of education and religion, continue to be violated in spite of the verbal assurances to the contrary given by the Albanian Government.
 These oppressive policies culminated in the arrest and trial of five prominent members of the Greek minority.
 I do not wish to go into the details included in the numerous reports and resolutions presented in this respect by many international bodies.
 to respect the rights of all persons within its jurisdiction to free expression and association without discrimination on the basis of ethnic origin or nationality.
 It is difficult to understand how all these summons and recommendations could be presented to this Assembly by the Albanian Foreign Minister as a source of satisfaction with his Government's achievements in the process of democratization.
 Regarding economic assistance from the European Union to Albania, I wish to point out that Greece has agreed to the granting of 15 million ECUs to Albania.
 In view of the deplorable event I have just referred to, Greece felt obliged to withhold the granting of this assistance until Albania demonstrates in practice its respect for basic rules of law and democratic freedoms.
 Regarding the illegal immigrant workers, it should be noted that in recent years about 250,000 to 300,000 Albanians crossed the Greek border seeking better conditions of life in Greece.
 This impressive number of illegal immigrants, which is quite out of proportion with the capacities of Greece, is partly due to the tolerance shown for humanitarian reasons by the Greek authorities towards this suffering neighbour people.
 May I add that the massive flow of remittances sent regularly to Albania constitutes a very important source of income for the ailing Albanian economy, a source which we thought would be duly appreciated.
 In order to cope with this problem in an orderly way, eight months ago the Greek Government proposed the conclusion of an agreement for seasonal employment and thus the legalization of Albanian workers in Greece, but the Albanian Government has not even responded.
 The Albanian Government's attitude was equally negative to our proposal for transborder cooperation and the prevention of crime.
 Faced with this situation, Greece could not but take the necessary measures provided for in its legislation, which is by no means punitive or more severe or restrictive than the legislation applied in such circumstances by other States of the international community.
 As to the alleged mistreatment of these illegal immigrants, suffice it to say that when deported they publicly declared to the mass media that their only desire was to return to Greece as soon as possible.
 Unfortunately, in view of the limited time allotted for the right of reply, it is not possible for my delegation to refute any single allegation, if indeed they were worthy of being refuted.
 I would not have taken this Assembly's time if the issues that I mentioned were merely bilateral differences between Greece and Albania but they are not.
 They are matters of broader interest, particularly to the United Nations, since they relate directly to respect for human rights and the fundamental freedoms of the individual.
 He painted a picture of facts, events and developments concerning the islands and relations with Iran which do not stand even the most lenient tests of veracity.
 The issue was discussed there, and he invited officials of the United Arab Emirates to resume negotiations in Tehran, an offer which still stands.
 It has, in fact, opted for a tactic of sensationalizing the issue and exploiting some organizations, without an Iranian presence, to adopt unfounded statements.
 For our part, on behalf of my Government, I announce once again the continued preparedness of the Islamic Republic of Iran to resume direct negotiations without any preconditions.
 The agreement of 1971 is alive and well, and it will be the basis of our common efforts, in the context of direct negotiations, to sort out our difficulties.
 My delegation fails to understand the genuine utility of this public exercise that the Foreign Minister of the United Arab Emirates is inventing, to wit, declaiming sovereignty against parts of the territory of the Islamic Republic of Iran in international gatherings, including the General Assembly.
 We owe it to our people and to history to abandon policies of provocation, irredentism and opportunism.
 Instead, we should earnestly seek to resolve our differences amicably and dispassionately so as to reinforce mutual confidence and good-neighbourly relations.
 Unfortunately, we are not convinced that the officials of the United Arab Emirates have the same approach to problem-solving or perhaps even the same agenda for the region.
 The historical, documented facts make it clear that the day the Iranian forces landed on the three islands in 1971, there was not a single Iranian national on any of them.
 All these are facts which refute the claims put forward by the Iranian Government to justify its occupation of these islands.
 The United Arab Emirates has unswervingly reaffirmed its legitimate sovereignty over those islands.
 The President (interpretation from French): I should like to inform members that the following representatives have been elected chairmen of the six Main Committees of the Assembly and are accordingly members of the General Committee for the forty-ninth session:
 I congratulate the Chairmen on their election.
 (c) One representative from an Eastern European State;
 (d) Three representatives from Latin American and Caribbean States;
 (f) Representatives of the five permanent members of the Security Council.
 We shall proceed accordingly.
 Mr. Hinds (Guyana): Permit me first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 I am confident that under your skilful guidance the Assembly will move forward in responding to the many complex issues on our agenda.
 You are equally assured of the full and unstinting support of Guyana in the discharge of your responsibilities in the period ahead.
 I have every confidence too that the work of the Organization will benefit much from the dynamic leadership of Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and his dedicated staff.
 The forty-ninth session of the General Assembly takes place at a momentous time.
 There have been changes, many of which have had a significant impact on global relations.
 World events now testify to the need for an Organization which is equipped to meet every challenge posed to it.
 While much has been accomplished, there are still considerable challenges ahead of us.
 An overview of the United Nations and its achievements has pointed to a greater awareness of its role in the world.
 Increasingly, the Organization is being called upon to respond to and resolve critical situations confronting our global community.
 It is now imperative that we move beyond merely responding to individual crises to address the fundamental causes of conflict and threats to global stability.
 In the year ahead, Guyana will work with the Assembly to make the United Nations more responsive to the altered situation we face in the post-cold-war era.
 We shall strive with others to make the Security Council more equitable and effective, so that it may better discharge the functions allocated to it under the Charter.
 As a priority, we shall seek to promote the work of the Organization in the formulation and implementation of an agenda for development, which should complement An Agenda for Peace.
 Equally important, we will press for the revitalization of this Assembly in order that, as the most representative body of the United Nations, it may harmonize our efforts to promote global peace and development.
 Efforts to achieve peace and security in the face of overwhelming odds reflect the desire of Member States to dwell in harmony, however difficult such an aim may be.
 They also reflect the increasing importance of peaceful negotiations to settle conflicts and to solve economic, social and human problems.
 In this context I wish to refer to the proposals of President Cheddi Jagan on a new global humanitarian order, in response to General Assembly resolution 47/106 of 16 December 1992.
 In his work, President Jagan has stressed the debilitating effects of poverty and hunger and the urgent need for concerted action to alleviate their effects.
 But apart from these classic humanitarian concerns, he has sought to broaden the tableau to include the entire spectrum of human development and related issues.
 He has emphasized the need for good governance and popular participation in decision-making as the cornerstone for a new type of development, which will take into consideration the satisfaction of basic human needs in health, education, housing and the right to productive employment for all.
 My Government has recognized that the question of basic human needs cannot be ignored.
 It is a prerequisite for good order and stability, which would in turn produce a stable political environment.
 Governments cannot afford to allow the growth of social discontent that is engendered by the vicious circle of debt, poverty and economic deprivation.
 There are many countries, not least my own, which suffer, not from open and violent conflict, but from the residue of a crushing external debt and the debilitating effects of an ongoing structural adjustment programme.
 In spite of all this, my Government is committed to providing for its people the basic necessities of health, housing, education and an economic and a social environment for both men and women to achieve their full potential.
 Some of the factors that inhibit advances towards a new economic and social order are attributed to the prevailing inequitable terms of trade and the persistent reduction in commodity earnings of exporters of primary products.
 However, social and economic problems are now not confined to developing countries.
 In this era of greater interdependence among nations and increasing globalization, issues and problems of economic growth and development, poverty, population growth and environmental destruction have become global.
 It is therefore necessary to first of all address the root causes of these problems before any tangible and lasting solutions are achieved.
 President Jagan's proposals for a New Global Humanitarian Order have therefore taken into account the globalization of these pressing issues.
 It is therefore my Government's fervent hope that this forty-ninth session will result in positive measures being taken to address the economic, social and humanitarian problems prevailing in the world today.
 We have shown the capacity to resolve supposedly intractable problems.
 I may refer here to the end of the iniquitous system of apartheid, when we all felt a sense of pride and accomplishment at the readmission of South Africa to the United Nations on 23 June 1994.
 I may also refer to the Middle East where we have seen a marvellous example of what can be achieved through patient diplomacy and dialogue, by the recent signing of a Peace Accord between Israel and Jordan.
 The earlier signature of the Declaration of Principles, together with the current self-rule in Gaza, point to the statesmanship of the leaders of Israel, the Palestinian people and the other parties to a conflict which has dragged on for far too long.
 In my own region, we see the possibility of the restoration of democracy in Haiti.
 The multinational operation now under way, of which Guyana is a part, offers the hope that, notwithstanding its inherent difficulties, the illegal government will finally abandon power.
 The international community must now work together to assist in the rebuilding of that country's institutions, as well as its economy, as a safeguard to its future welfare.
 We hope that the maturity displayed in those negotiations will spill over to a correlative issue, the economic embargo, and that Cuba will be allowed to pursue its economic rehabilitation for the benefit of its people.
 A peaceful resolution of the Cyprus problem, which has seemed to be elusive, continues to be our great desire.
 Guyana remains hopeful that the efforts of the Secretary-General and the goodwill of the parties involved will lead to a satisfactory solution.
 I would therefore urge serious consideration of the New Global Humanitarian Order, which is aimed at fusing various aspects of past and future undertakings by this Assembly.
 This new order will effectively bridge the gap between rhetoric and implementation, and will succeed in dealing directly with the common problems which face us all.
 Let us therefore work together to enhance the role of this august body.
 Let us also, through mutual respect and tolerance, work to promote better relations between all nations and peoples.
 Mr. Samuel Hinds, Prime Minister of the Republic of Guyana, was escorted from the rostrum.
 Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic): It is my pleasure at the outset to extend to you as President of the Assembly at its forty-ninth session, Sir, and to your fraternal country, Ce d'Ivoire, my sincere congratulations on your election to preside over this momentous international assembly.
 I should also like to express our appreciation to Ambassador Samuel Insanally, who conducted the proceedings of the last session with great skill.
 I avail myself of this opportunity as well to mention with appreciation the persistent efforts and tireless drive of His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretary-General of the United Nations, to enhance the role of the United Nations in international affairs and to further the Organization's noble objectives.
 We also note with appreciation his sincere and continuous endeavours in the field of development and international economic cooperation, to which the content of his report An Agenda for Development bears witness.
 The Secretary-General's report An Agenda for Development prompts us to reflect anew, as we approach the twenty-first century, upon the future of international cooperation in all its aspects.
 As the international community witnessed profound changes in the wake of the 1815 Vienna Conference, the big powers and others met to establish patterns for relationships amongst States within the framework of a global order, to be buttressed by an international consensus.
 Yet the current international period, fraught with a host of interlocked variables, is noted for the absence of a similar consensus whereby the features of the new world order could be identified.
 One is the fragmentation that has occurred in certain regions of the world, causing the emergence on the political map of new States on ethnic and cultural bases.
 The amazing pace and speed of these changes call for new visions so that the present can be managed and the future's dimensions charted.
 The desirable structure of the global world order should, in our view, rest on the following basic principles. First, the creation of a new vision for all aspects of development.
 Second, the development of an internationally agreed-upon mechanism for the maintenance of world peace and security.
 Comprehensive development is a cornerstone of world peace.
 As the Secretary-General has said in his report, development is a fundamental human right.
 We understand that the concept of development means, basically, the achievement and sustaining of socio-economic progress.
 If we look back 25 years to consider a 1969 study entitled A Study of the Capacity of the United Nations Development System, we are likely to realize how optimistic that study was and, in contrast, how frustrating is the present condition of development in developing countries.
 Hence our conviction that the Secretary-General's An Agenda for Development and his call for a new vision are an attempt to cast the development process, with all its human and material complications, in a new form that would meet the basic needs of developing countries.
 The significance of the summit is underlined by its programme of work, which addresses three important issues: the alleviation of poverty and eradication of need, the creation of employment opportunities and the promotion of social integration.
 Economic growth is a central element of comprehensive development.
 Although the world economy's performance has improved, relatively speaking, its growth rate still falls short of the rates of the 1970s and 1980s.
 Economic problems that plague the world economy continue to have adverse effects on the economies of developing countries in particular, on their development process.
 Those countries are beset by economic problems that are primarily external and are manifested mainly in indebtedness, the decline in the prices of commodities including oil, high interest rates, the decline in investments, fluctuation of the rate of exchange, scarcity of cash flows and international trade barriers.
 In spite of economic disagreements between States, the economic situation will improve with firm political will and the genuine desire on the part of all States to solve the economic problems of the world today.
 We believe that the terms and framework of the Uruguay Round should translate into access to markets and expansion of international trade to cover all States.
 In addition, the World Trade Organization should contribute effectively to the establishment of a non-discriminatory trade system.
 It should be based on three basic elements: the establishment of a feasible collective-security system, the peaceful settlement of regional and international disputes and disarmament.
 Preventive diplomacy is undoubtedly an effective instrument for preventing the outbreak and escalation of hostilities between States that would use or threaten to use force.
 Disarmament is an important requirement for the maintenance of world peace and security.
 The nightmares generated by stockpiles of weapons, especially nuclear weapons, continue to haunt humanity and to cause great anxiety throughout the world in view of the threat that such weapons pose to the human race and its security.
 In the wake of the bipolar era, and as an inevitable result of the cold war, the international community has turned its attention to the question of disarmament.
 Although an understanding to curb the increase in nuclear stockpiles has been reached as a result of certain concerted efforts, those stockpiles have yet to be adequately reduced.
 It is regrettable that the world has become capriciously involved in another dilemma of a different type.
 I refer to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and related technology through their acquisition by illegitimate means.
 The world is experiencing an important epochal transformation as communities shift their focus from individual States to regional groupings, such as the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf and the European Union.
 This phase is expected to lead to another, in which interaction and cohesion between States and regional groups, with their diverse cultures, is enhanced, with the ultimate goal of creating a world that is economically, culturally and intellectually interrelated.
 This reality underlines the need for dialogue, especially since we are at the threshold of the twenty-first century.
 The significance of the Cairo Conference was due to the crucial human-life-related issues that it addressed, such as the family and family planning, productive health, the relationship between the environment and inhabitants and other issues that concern countries, both rich and poor.
 Bahrain, which participated in that Conference, has endorsed such provisions of the Final Document as are consonant with the magnanimous Islamic law, our social values and our national legislation.
 The Middle East is one of the regions that have experienced particularly severe and bloody wars and hostilities.
 The longest of these was the Arab-Israeli conflict, which repeatedly threatened regional and international security.
 This fact underlines the need to establish the order of relations between the States of the region on a basis of co-equal security.
 Bahrain welcomed the signing of the Declaration of Principles between the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel on 13 September 1993 and regarded it as the first step toward a comprehensive peaceful and just settlement in the Middle East.
 Since that historic event there have been other developments in the peace process. Among these was the signing, in Cairo on 4 May, of the self-rule Agreement between the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel.
 The Jordanian and Israeli sides also were able to sign the Washington Declaration on 25 July this year.
 We welcome these developments and hope that they will constitute a first positive move towards a comprehensive and just peace on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the other resolutions of international legality and the land-for-peace principle.
 It is our hope that, in the context of the peace process in the region, efforts on the other tracks will yield positive results so that the process may be concluded successfully.
 It is hoped that the negotiations will lead to complete Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories, including Holy Al-Quds, the Syrian Arab Golan and southern Lebanon.
 All peoples and countries of the region should reap the tangible results.
 It is our conviction that the peace process should be comprehensive and integrated, for it would be futile to focus on achieving peace and development in one part of the region while leaving unresolved problems of others.
 Mutual security and vital interests should involve all parties that are called upon to take part in peacemaking and mutual development.
 In this context, all steps by all parties should be taken in a measured, balanced and equitable manner.
 We also call on Israel to withdraw completely and unconditionally from southern Lebanon, pursuant to Security Council resolution 425 (1978).
 The past has taught us that inequitable peace is the shortest way to more crises.
 This must be realized by all those who are interested in the future well-being and stability of the region.
 Security, stability and political balance in sensitive regions are important.
 Territorial and boundary claims aimed at changing the present boundaries of States are matters of concern to my country.
 It is our conviction that the ideal means of dealing with such issues is to respect the existing and generally recognized borders between States, and to settle all differences that may rise by peaceful means acceptable to both sides.
 Accordingly, we stress that Iraq should implement Security Council resolutions relating to Kuwait and should officially recognize Kuwait's sovereignty and release all Kuwaiti and other prisoners of war and detainees.
 As we call on Iraq to comply with the requirements of international legitimacy, we express at the same time our insistence on Iraq's unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity and our sympathy with the brotherly people of Iraq, who are beset by difficult economic and living conditions.
 The plight that has afflicted the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the last two and a half years persists with full intensity.
 This year, the Serb aggressors have continued relentlessly to commit appalling massacres, killings, torture and rape against unarmed Bosnians, in flagrant disregard of the rules of international humanitarian law that outlaw such practices.
 In pursuance of their policy of fait accompli through the seizure of more territory, the aggressors persist in preventing delivery of humanitarian relief supplies, violating the sanctity of and destroying places of worship and carrying out ethnic cleansing.
 The unabated aggression against the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a clear test of the effectiveness of the United Nations and its role in providing protection to populations.
 The Serb aggression against Sarajevo and Gorazde has shown the extent to which the Security Council is intentionally avoiding ensuring that its own resolutions are implemented against the Serbs.
 The adoption by Security Council of resolution 943 (1994) which relaxed the sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro was, in our view, tantamount to rewarding an aggressor whose credibility has not been demonstrated.
 We believe rather that the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the one that deserves reparations and should be rewarded for accepting the peace plan advanced recently by the five-party Contact Group a plan rejected by the Serbs.
 Through its President, Mr. Alija Izetbegovic, the Republic of Bosnia Herzegovina also accepted the proposed postponement of the lifting of the arms embargo against it for another six months, a position that indeed warrants appreciation by the international community and all peace-loving nations.
 Among the appalling developments in Rwanda this year were the dreadful massive massacres committed in tribal strife within the nation.
 As far as the Cyprus question is concerned, we are interested in seeing the obstacles to settlement removed.
 We are deeply encouraged by the good offices of the Secretary-General and hope they will lead to a solution that may be satisfactory to both communities, especially now that both sides have declared that they accept, in principle, a set of confidence-building measures.
 In that year we will celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations.
 Although the Organization coexisted with political polarization during the cold-war era, the peoples and Governments of the world continued to be loyal to it for five decades.
 The Organization should develop itself into an effective instrument capable of coping with global changes.
 A number of important steps should therefore be taken, including above all gaining the support of the Security Council for the desired reforms.
 The growing number of Member States and the emergence in the international arena of new influential Powers justify such reforms.
 Proceeding from this, Bahrain looks forward to contributing to such efforts should it be elected to a term on the Security Council.
 If it is perceived that application is selective, credibility will suffer and the moral authority which is a basic feature of the Charter will be weakened.
 Notwithstanding certain failures, the many great successes the Organization has achieved in many parts of the world deepen our conviction that the United Nations an indispensable guarantee for a future in which our hopes for international peace and security will be fulfilled.
 Mankind longs for stability and peace based on solid foundations of understanding, good-neighbourliness and non-interference in internal affairs as a means of consolidating the ideals of justice, security and peace amongst all nations.
 The President (interpretation from French): I call upon the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh, His Excellency Mr. Mostafizur Rahman.
 Your election is a tribute not only to you personally but also to your great country, Ce d'Ivoire.
 I am confident you will carry forward the high tradition set by your predecessor, Ambassador Samuel Insanally of Guyana, to whom we owe our deep appreciation.
 As we stand at the threshold of the United Nations fiftieth anniversary, one goal remains paramount, namely, the need to promote human development and human security in all its manifold aspects.
 The role and relevance of the people are enshrined in the very first words of the Charter.
 People form the key link that bind our global society, the source of democracy, the object of humanitarian concern, the spirit of justice in ensuring human and minority rights.
 They are the cause and object of all our endeavour.
 The success or failure of the United Nations stems from the contribution each Member makes to promote its goals.
 The Organization's principal motivation arises out of the responsibility borne by each nation for the stability and welfare of its own people.
 It is the sum total of these individual efforts that marks the United Nations measured progress towards maintaining peace, securing justice and realizing the Charter prerogative of social progress and better standards of living in larger freedom.
 International cooperation has become an imperative, not only because it is possible or necessary, but because it is indispensable in a world that has moved from interaction to interrelationship to interdependence.
 As we seek to seize opportunities and confront challenges at every level individual, national or global we are deeply aware of the contradictory forces at work, forces that emanate from both within and without our nations.
 The way we channel these forces into productive activities will determine the success of our common endeavour to forge a just and stable world order.
 Pragmatic cutbacks in strategic weapons and a heightened focus on the destabilizing capabilities of conventional weapons have opened doors for more productive use of human, financial and material resources.
 Historic political changes in the Middle East and South Africa and political settlements in Asia and Central America can have a far-reaching positive impact on those regions.
 After a long period of stagnation the global economy is poised for its first significant expansion.
 More importantly, the desire and ability of developing countries to contribute to the growth of the world economy and help to mitigate common global concerns as participants and not as bystanders has significantly increased.
 Together, they call for a concerted response, nationally and internationally, that is new and imaginative.
 Today, issues of territorial security are being overshadowed by concerns over human security.
 There is increasing recognition of non-military threats to security.
 Nation States are under siege from multiple forces from within and without that are retarding their capacity to act effectively and independently.
 New global forces have emerged that no State acting alone can control but which threaten the legitimacy of all States.
 Pollution, ecological damage, the spread of communicable diseases and the massive speculative transfers of monies by electronic means have been the cause and manifestation of a host of cumulative ills.
 Furthermore, rapid technological progress and transnational processes are reducing the scope of nation States to act on their own, to regulate domestic policies and the international movements of goods, services, labour and capital.
 On another plane, fears are surfacing that the bipolar world of the past 50 years could now assume a new configuration, a North-South polarity, not between opposing political and social systems but between rich and poor nations.
 There are signs that, while social and environmental issues are being highlighted, vital economic and development imperatives are being sidelined, although both are integrally related and mutually reinforcing.
 It is against the backdrop of those prospects and problems that I now turn to the position and priorities of our Government.
 There is strong recognition in Bangladesh today that to promote representative and constitutional government, strengthen human rights and ensure socio-economic emancipation a country must increasingly depend on itself.
 Individual self-reliance must be bolstered by collective self-reliance through South-South cooperation in concrete and practical areas of cooperation such as food production, manpower planning, trade, investment and joint ventures.
 The critical catalyst, however, remains a reactivation of a constructive North-South dialogue leading to a more conducive external environment that can supplement individual efforts.
 Reaching out to the attainment of these goals, Bangladesh has a development policy that embraces a fourfold perspective: addressing structural and macroeconomic reform; stimulating the market economy; increasing the quality and amount of productive investments; and concentrating on human-resources development, particularly the empowerment of women.
 These perspectives are all linked together by the unifying theme of the alleviation of poverty.
 The cardinal emphasis is on the connection between structural adjustment and alleviation of poverty that is, the quantity and quality of programmes favouring the needs of the poor and most vulnerable.
 Our efforts at reform and consolidation have led to some positive results.
 Bangladesh is enjoying today perhaps the longest period of macroeconomic stability in its history.
 Foreign-exchange reserves are comfortable, inflation is at an all-time low, and there is increased self-reliance in financing our annual development plans.
 Today we are financing 38 per cent of our development projects from our own resources.
 We have achieved near self-sufficiency in food production, and the overall gross-domestic-product growth rate has reached 5 per cent.
 The incidence of absolute poverty has decreased and some headway has been made in advancing our human-development policy.
 We can reasonably be proud of our efforts to stabilize population growth and contain and mitigate the impact of natural disasters.
 Democracy has taken firm root in Bangladesh.
 Like all democracies we have our share of domestic differences, but we remain fully committed to working out our differences through democratic dialogue and the rule of law.
 Our experience has demonstrated vividly that without improved standards of living and a vision of the future that can sustain hope, democracy will wither.
 It is also clear that, to survive within States, democracy needs to be sustained through democratization among States so that it can expand universally as an essential foundation for cooperation.
 We firmly believe that the restoration and consolidation of democracy worldwide within States and among States is a vital bed-rock for peace.
 We are indeed happy that the 1993 World Conference on Human Rights, in Vienna, upheld the right to development as a basic human right and as a vital catalyst in mutually reinforcing the interrelationship of democracy, development and human rights.
 Widespread poverty and economic deprivation seriously vitiate the protection and promotion of human rights in many societies, despite the best of intentions.
 For national efforts to succeed, it is essential to create an atmosphere of peace within our own region.
 The Prime Minister stated that the options of unilateralism and bilateralism might seem tempting in the short run but in the long-term interests of the SAARC spirit we need to display more commitment for multilateralism and for building a better regional consensus.
 Bilaterally, we have taken important steps to strengthen constructive relations with all our immediate neighbours in pursuit of our policy of friendship, cooperation and peaceful coexistence with all countries of the world.
 The exodus of 250,000 Myanmar refugees to Bangladesh since 1991 has imposed an enormous socio-economic and environmental burden on our country.
 There has been some improvement in our relations with our largest neighbour, India, on the issue of the return of Chakma refugees and on that of economic interactions.
 However, the critical issue of sharing Ganges waters remains unresolved.
 Meanwhile, one dry season has followed after another without any water flowing to the Ganges and this is having a cumulatively disastrous effect on the economy and environment of one third of our country and on the socio-economic survival of 40 million people.
 We earnestly hope that India, our partner in the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and our neighbour, would agree to a fair sharing of common rivers, including the Ganges.
 National efforts in the absence of global cooperation have only limited prospects of improving the human condition and ensuring peace, justice and development.
 The Secretary-General has set the stage with his proposals put forward in An Agenda for Peace and in An Agenda for Development.
 Bangladesh has been an active participant in this concerted build-up.
 The end of the cold war should not mark the end of competition to support development around the world.
 The global society is only as strong as its weakest link.
 Resolving social issues must be based on the recognition of the centrality of the individual, the acceptance of human equality, and the worth and dignity of the human person.
 The core of development and its main impetus will remain accelerated economic growth fuelled by the input of additional resources and by resource generation.
 Mr. Arzoumanian (Armenia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 The growing divide between rich and poor among and within nations is of central concern.
 The plight of the least developed countries assumes special poignancy at a time when the world economy has yet to show convincing signs of recovery, macroeconomic coordination is weak and poverty is inexorably deepening.
 The unabated development crisis calls for urgent remedial action, especially to implement quickly the 1990s Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries.
 A proper response to these problems requires accelerating growth, writing off debts, wider and preferential access of exports to markets of developing countries markets, enhanced flow of foreign direct investment and supportive action in the area of services and labour.
 Today, even food availability is determined by access to employment and financial resources.
 Reducing damage to the ecosystem and mitigating the consequences of natural disasters continue to be a great burden for all concerned.
 Unchecked consumption of resources, production patterns triggered by developed countries and the real plight of the poor need to be dealt with through remedial action rather than analysis.
 A key factor would be the promotion of socio-economic development and the protection of migrants.
 Strengthening the rule of international law is imperative, inasmuch as it offers certainty, predictability and the assurance of the legitimate interests of all States.
 This continues to be the only real protection for smaller and weaker States, especially in areas where the absence of law can mean a serious potential for conflicts such as the scarcity and sharing of water, maritime jurisdiction, transboundary pollution and environmental damage, and so on.
 A critical yardstick for all these concerns is the issue of limited resources and the need for new and additional resources.
 It calls for balancing long-term interests that will not only address continuing emergencies and immediate conflicts but will face up to the underlying silent crisis of development.
 They call for solutions that must be adapted to widely differing circumstances in new and creative ways.
 Many nations bear the burden of recent devastation and ethnic strife.
 No one is safe from the threat of nuclear overkill and nascent nuclear proliferation.
 The ongoing arms race, the potential of a return to antagonistic spheres of influence, and the threat of regional hegemony all carry within them the dangers of conflict and destabilization.
 Among Bangladesh's major priorities are the following.
 The enhanced role and contribution of the International Court of Justice now assumes much greater relevance.
 Secondly, the reduction of military expenditures is essential for development and peace.
 Escalating arms expenditures continue to consume too large a share of productive resources and capacities.
 From 1987 to 1992, the cumulative peace dividend resulting from reduced military expenses and cut-backs in arms amounted to some $500 billion in both developed and developing countries.
 Reduced reliance on military security must also be buttressed through monitoring, regulating and limiting the growing traffic in arms, especially the clandestine arms trade.
 Thirdly, regional efforts and regional disarmament are vital imperatives to stabilize peace.
 Regional groups can and must harness durable structures of stability at the base, through confidence-building measures and broad-based socio-economic cooperation.
 Disarmament and arms control are the major vehicle to reduce the threat of destabilization, economic decline and tensions leading to war.
 A new momentum has been generated that needs to be pushed and sustained.
 Progress towards negotiating a comprehensive nuclear test ban, the signing of the chemical weapons Convention, the establishment of a Register on conventional arms these are important milestones on this road.
 A critical concern is the objective of extending the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) either indefinitely or for limited periods, contingent on progress on the other objectives of the Treaty, nuclear disarmament and peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
 We strongly add our voice in concert with those who seek to make peace operations a more effective instrument of collective security and to enhance the structural framework for performing and managing peace-keeping, including strengthened staff, stronger logistic capability and greater coordination, standardization and support for training.
 In the formulation of critical follow-up guidelines to strengthen peace-keeping we would like to pinpoint the following matters.
 First, there is a need to define clear-cut mandates with definite time frames, objectives and rules of engagement and with secured financing.
 This must keep in view the real constraint identified by the Secretary-General, that traditional assumptions relating to the consent and cooperation of parties, upholding of agreements and minimum use of force have all been under challenge in recent peace-keeping developments.
 Thirdly, there should be clear-cut political directions and a clearly defined command and control structure for each operation.
 Fourthly, contributions to peace-keeping operations are mandatory and arrears must be paid in full.
 Intimately connected to the process of peace-building in both its political and economic dimension are efforts to reform and revitalize the main organs of the United Nations the General Assembly and the Security Council.
 Bangladesh has been an active participant in this exercise and will continue to play a constructive, moderating and flexible role to promote the realization of these efforts for greater democratization, efficiency, effectiveness and legitimacy.
 I turn now to some of the critical political issues on our agenda.
 Bangladesh's consistent and categorical position on the Middle East question and the issue of Palestine needs no reiteration.
 We believe that a historic momentum has been initiated since the Madrid Peace Conference in October 1991, the signing of the Declaration of Principles between Israel and Palestine in September 1993, the Cairo agreement on Gaza and Jericho and the common agenda agreed between Jordan and Israel this year.
 We hail the establishment of a united, democratic and non-racial Republic of South Africa, a long-cherished goal, and applaud all parties for their relentless and courageous endeavour to this end.
 Our special tribute goes to President Nelson Mandela and Mr. de Klerk.
 Bangladesh looks forward to consolidating our relations with South Africa in more concrete ways, bilaterally and in all multilateral forums.
 We are deeply concerned over the vicious cycle of starvation, factional fighting, breakdown of central authority, economic stagnation and exodus of refugees in various parts of Africa, exemplified by the situation in Rwanda.
 We are committed to supporting the Security Council's effort, especially through peace-keeping operations, to break this cycle through a comprehensive programme of action that could provide vital relief assistance, consolidate cease-fires, curtail violence and bring about national reconciliation.
 We welcome the efforts of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Arab League to promote and supplement these efforts.
 We welcome efforts, including those of the Secretary-General of the OIC, the United Nations and special representatives aimed at bringing about a comprehensive and peaceful settlement in Afghanistan.
 The latest plan drawn up by the Contact Group of representatives from the United States, Russia, the United Nations and the European Union has been rejected by the Bosnian Serbs.
 At the heart of the issue is the dismemberment of a sovereign Member of the United Nations, justified on the basis of pragmatic reality.
 We feel that continuing pressure must be maintained on the former Yugoslavia to recognize Bosnia and Herzegovina and effectively realize a just and negotiated settlement.
 If present efforts of the Contact Group fail to result in a political settlement we fully support the convening, under United Nations auspices, of an appropriately structured international conference on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 Bangladesh has pledged its fullest support to this end, guided by two key principles: commitment to the preservation and restoration of democracy wherever it is threatened in the world, and willingness to serve in peace-keeping operations under United Nations command mandated by the Security Council.
 Mr. Bird (Antigua and Barbuda): I wish first to extend to Foreign Minister Essy and the people of the Republic of Ce d'Ivoire congratulations on his election to the presidency of the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
 In welcoming him and wishing him well in his stewardship of the momentous work of this Assembly, I recall that he replaces in this important office a son of my own subregion, the Caribbean.
 Thirteen years ago my country was admitted to this body as an independent Member State.
 As Foreign Minister at that time, I said to this Assembly:
 I am before you as a representative of the wretchedness that is the residue of colonialism, a wretchedness which includes unemployment and underemployment, inadequate housing and insufficient medical facilities.
 Since I spoke those words in this Assembly, there has been little action by the developed nations to help alter these conditions in my country.
 Indeed, they have done little in the Caribbean as a whole.
 If anything, the terms of our involvement in international economic relations have worsened as prices for our commodities have decreased, the costs of our imports have increased and our access to preferential markets has diminished.
 Today the Caribbean subregion occupies the attention of the international community because of events in Haiti.
 In some States real income dropped by as much as one quarter during the 1980s.
 Despite this decline in real gross domestic product, many countries in our region are forced to repay debt that is wrapped tightly around their necks, strangling their efforts to breathe life into their economies.
 Mark you, this is debt that they have repaid many times over if the onerous interest rates are discounted.
 In the meantime, the massive haemorrhage of foreign exchange occasioned by this intractable debt burden seriously hampers the long-term social and economic prospects for some of our States.
 In my own country's case, debt has been incurred by the Government acting as a catalyst for economic development in the absence of sufficient official development assistance or private investment flows despite generous incentives.
 It also urges a relaxation by Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries in particular of their position on bilateral debt.
 If our countries are to maintain political stability and promote economic progress, we need relief from the great burden that debt places upon us.
 The multilateral financial institutions, and the major Powers which control them, must become less ideologically inflexible and more alert to the deleterious effect of some of their policies on poor States.
 It is a startlingly telling measure of the wide divergence of views between developed and developing countries that this week developing countries rejected out of hand a proposal by major Powers in the IMF on ways to increase world monetary reserves.
 There is an urgent need for urgent, meaningful and sincere dialogue between representatives of the rich and poor nations to bridge this gap in consultation and consensus-building.
 If such a dialogue does not begin, and begin soon, we may well witness a stand-off in relations that will paralyse economic cooperation and progress on a global scale.
 I urge that within the institutions of the Organization itself specifically within the Economic and Social Council and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) such a dialogue should begin with the resolve of reaching a practical programme on which both rich and poor have agreed.
 Debt forgiveness should be a minimum of 50 per cent of existing debt, the original principal of which, as I pointed out earlier, has long been repaid.
 Secondly, the international community should also establish a standard to set a fixed percentage of export revenue for the repayment of debt.
 Without a standard, indebted countries will face the prospect of worsening poverty for decades to come.
 We should recall that the precedent of debt forgiveness was set by two members of the Security Council, Britain and the United States.
 In 1946 the terms of a large United States loan to war-torn Britain stipulated that interest should be waived altogether should such interest exceed 2 per cent of British export revenues in any given year.
 That standard helped Britain to survive.
 We ask for no more.
 Worsening poverty has grave implications for development and democracy in our region implications which, in the long term, may cost the multilateral financial institutions and their wealthier members more than the debt they could forgive, or cause to be forgiven, in the short term.
 The migration of such people causes problems both for the countries from which they move and the countries which receive them.
 For the sending countries vital skills are lost, skills that could contribute to the social and economic development of the sending countries.
 In this regard, preventive measures need to be taken by the international community, led by this Organization, to mitigate root causes of emigration.
 Among such preventive measures must be action to guarantee stability in developing countries.
 Within the Caribbean subregion, the member States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) are working at deepening our integration arrangements to explore ways in which we can strengthen our economies by our own efforts.
 We have also looked beyond the insular Caribbean to the wider Caribbean, including every country of the littoral.
 We expect that one of the major benefits of the ACS will be the promotion of the interests of our grouping in international economic and trade forums.
 These actions, which we ourselves are taking, are part of the set of preventive measures to guarantee stability in our region.
 The international community should not assume, however, that the crisis in Haiti arose only from internal factors.
 Much of its genesis resides in the attitude of major international actors motivated by their own domestic concerns.
 Haiti's independence in 1804, born of the uprising of black slaves against the colonial Power, caused it to be ostracized from the world community.
 When Toussaint Louverture led his successful revolt, Haiti was the richest colony in the world, producing more and trading more with Europe and the United States than the rest of the Caribbean colonies combined.
 But the hostile international environment in which it was born reduced it from the richest colony in the world to the poorest nation in the Western Hemisphere.
 Since then, international actors have continued to influence events in Haiti, accommodating in their own interests dictatorial regimes and military Governments and ignoring the country's growing poverty and the utter disregard for human rights.
 In this context, let me digress for a moment to take the opportunity to call upon the United States and Cuba to open a dialogue to end the impasse that has characterized their relationship for the past 30 years, threatening the stability of Latin America and the Caribbean.
 Recently those two countries demonstrated in this very city their capacity to sit at the table of peace and negotiate an agreement to end the movement of so-called refugees from Cuba to the United States.
 Surely the capacity to reach such an agreement shows that other agreements are possible.
 The willingness of the United States and Cuba to act now in their own interest would avert not only the continued hardship the Cuban people endure, but would eliminate any perception of threats to their individual security and the security of our region as a whole.
 My small country agreed to provide a safe haven for Haitian refugees, just as we agreed to contribute one eighth of our small military force to the multinational expedition authorized by Security Council resolution 940 (1994).
 We did so because we wanted to see an end to their suffering.
 We did so because we wanted to stamp out the cancer of dictatorship and human rights abuse in our subregion.
 As it turned out, our motivation to bring order and justice to Haiti coincided with the motivation of others who have the resources to commit to the military undertaking, which became imperative after diplomatic efforts, especially by representatives of the United Nations itself, had been fully exhausted.
 Since the end of the cold war the Security Council has had to invoke Chapter VII, which provides for Action with respect to threats to the peace, breaches of the peace, and acts of aggression, in relation to Iraq, Liberia, Somalia, the former Yugoslavia and, now, Haiti.
 My Government supports the growing body of opinion that holds that the international community must not remain a passive spectator when Governments massacre their own people or cause them to starve.
 In such cases the United Nations must act, and should be allowed to do so under the Charter, without having to resort to Chapter VII.
 But in doing so they absolutely must balance safeguarding human rights with protecting a State's right to autonomy.
 We must all be mindful that respect for State sovereignty is a fundamental cornerstone of the international legal order.
 An activist United Nations will not long survive as a legitimate and........... effective actor if it is used simply as a cover for the intervention of major Powers.
 Intervention should follow principled criteria and should be consistent and even-handed.
 The time has come to move away from the anachronism of five permanent members and to establish arrangements which are capable of change with the passage of time and the evolution of events.
 The time has come for equity for all nations large and small in the membership of the Council.
 I return now to the point at which I started the role that the United Nations has played in the almost 50 years since the Charter was signed to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
 For much of its existence the Organization was hampered by the cold war and the struggle for supremacy between the major Powers.
 While there has been order, it has been without justice and without equity.
 As the United Nations approaches its fiftieth anniversary no longer shackled by the cold-war rivalry of the major Powers as it looks to the future, it has an extraordinary opportunity to fulfil the aspirations of the Charter which have so long remained mere words.
 In doing so, it can advance the interests of all mankind by providing a meaningful forum for genuine dialogue between the rich and poor for the establishment of conditions for development, and thus, for peace.
 The inseparable links between peace and development must be acknowledged and fully understood because the deterioration of economic and social conditions can give root to divisive political strife and military conflict.
 The end of the cold war should encourage a reformed, refreshed and representative Security Council to look beyond conventional security to security born of political stability and economic progress for all nations large and small.
 My own small country is willing to do its part.
 The President: I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan, Mr. Kanat Saudabayev.
 I should also like to thank his predecessor, Ambassador Insanally, for the able stewardship, efficiency and tact he demonstrated during the forty-eighth session.
 May I also express our special gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his tireless efforts to consolidate peace and stability and to strengthen the role of the United Nations in the life of the international community.
 Our world, multifaceted and contradictory, is rapidly approaching the end of the second millennium.
 I hope that the confrontation by force which existed throughout the decades of the cold war and its underlying concept that history is an evolving process of struggle between the competing systems are now definitely a part of the past.
 Today, the world is searching for new institutional structures, non-confrontational approaches to the solution of global problems and a more efficient utilization of human, material and technical resources.
 Looking into the future, full of hope, we should not rule out the possibility of meeting new challenges.
 Indeed, a common set of global problems that existed before has been replaced by numerous other problems no less complex or immense.
 In our opinion, the United Nations has never experienced such an important period in its nearly half century-old history.
 The beginning of the 1990s and the fiftieth anniversary of the Organization can and should become a truly historic milestone that will determine the new tasks of the United Nations and considerably strengthen its role in the life of the succeeding generations.
 For us, three years of freedom have been three years of achieving real political and economic independence.
 The Republic, having become a Member of the United Nations and other international organizations, having signed the Helsinki Final Act, the Charter of Paris and a number of other international instruments, has de jure completed its entry into the world community.
 In December 1993, the Parliament of our Republic ratified the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as a non-nuclear State.
 At the coming 1995 NPT Review Conference, we intend to join the position of those States that favour an unconditional extension of the NPT for an unlimited period of time.
 From this rostrum I declare that the Republic of Kazakhstan, deeply committed to the strengthening of its national sovereignty and security and the process of political and economic reforms in society, is genuinely interested in international stability and the development of cooperation with all States.
 That is our consistent policy, not subject to any changes dictated by short-term experience.
 I should like to emphasize in particular that we intend to achieve our objectives while taking existing realities into account and effectively using the geopolitical location of Kazakhstan as a kind of link between Europe and Asia, between East and West.
 Its purpose is to develop fundamental principles and areas of cooperation in the context of strengthening peace and stability and promoting the economic prosperity of Asian States.
 Today the idea of this Conference is being put into practice.
 Therefore, we think that the political will of the States of the region towards the purposeful and careful management of these processes should speed up the creation of global economic and political structures, similar to those in Europe.
 The opportunities to overcome the economic and social crisis, and inter-ethnic and inter-State conflicts, and to ensure external and internal security and stability through the proposed mechanism of unification have been received with understanding by politicians and leaders of different States.
 Since the creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), stability and security as the basis of economic and social reforms have come to the forefront.
 The proposed union is open to all States.
 During the transition period, the proposed EAU most adequately reflects the interests of the States of the region, regardless of their size, population, economic and other indicators.
 It provides an opportunity to demonstrate their willingness to cooperate on an equal basis, as well as their commitment to reforms in the interests of all the nations of the region.
 In putting forward these initiatives, Kazakhstan assumes that the problems they seek to resolve are pressing for all countries of the world, and for such an authoritative Organization as the United Nations.
 The foreign-policy approaches of Kazakhstan were the basis for our decision to join the Partnership for Peace programme of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
 Kazakhstan, as a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), strives to implement its foreign policy initiatives in practical terms and, accordingly, takes into account and respects the legal rights and interests of other CIS States.
 The true interests of the multi-ethnic population of Kazakhstan lie not only in the maintenance but also in the expansion of common economic, political, military and strategic partnership and interaction within the CIS.
 Our Republic maintains special relations with the Russian Federation, all the Republics of Central Asia Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and other CIS States.
 Certainly, the most important direction for Central Asian interaction is our common interest in strengthening peace, stability and security, both in regional and global dimensions.
 A vivid example of this is our joint endeavours to settle the situation on the Tajik-Afghan border.
 Thus, at the meeting of the Presidents, Prime Ministers and Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan held at Almaty last July the situation on the Tajik-Afghan border was discussed and a joint statement was adopted.
 Guided by the need to maintain peace and ensure a favourable environment for successful economic and political reforms and greater independence of their countries, the Foreign Ministers of the three States appealed to the conflicting parties to stop hostile activities and settle existing problems by political means through negotiations.
 Kazakhstan's efforts towards integration at the regional and interregional level need the support of international organizations and the leading countries of the world.
 The main purpose of these endeavours, we believe, should be to preserve and develop the spirit of global partnership born at Rio two years ago and to ensure the environmentally safe, sustainable development of the whole world.
 We view this as a manifestation of the comprehensive approach by the United Nations in the field of socio-economic policy and deem it to be the most productive way to meet the challenges of global sustainable social and economic development.
 In this context it is a matter of concern to us that, according to some forecasts, the gap in the levels of factual and required assistance will sharply increase when unemployment in the States of the former Soviet Union peaks.
 This is expected as a consequence of the closure of unprofitable State enterprises.
 Against that background, the current level of Western assistance to our market reforms will not be enough to make progress towards the implementation of a second Marshall Plan.
 Another priority of socio-economic development in our country is its activity in the field of environment.
 All these things seriously hamper the process of social and economic reform in Kazakhstan.
 However, the States of the region have very limited financial and technical resources.
 When we speak about the balanced and sustainable development of society we cannot leave out the issue of human rights.
 If an individual is poor and deprived of the elementary means of life, his political rights are meaningless.
 Kazakhstan took an active part in that Conference and believes that its outcome will be yet another practical contribution to United Nations efforts to ensure global sustainable development.
 Kazakhstan supports the joint endeavours of Member States to reform the principal organs of the United Nations, especially the Security Council.
 Without going into the details of this difficult issue, I should like to note that the current session of the General Assembly is not an ordinary one, because it will have to adopt a new scale of assessments for the apportionment of United Nations expenses for the period 1995-1997.
 Since the creation of this problem Kazakhstan has demonstrated realism and a balanced approach and has tried to take into consideration the interests of other Member States.
 We hope that the principle of the capacity to pay and of the need to improve the methodology of the scale by eliminating its most distorting elements will be taken fully into account in the determination of the new scale of assessments.
 This would undoubtedly help to improve the Organization's overall financial situation.
 Kazakhstan has welcomed concrete steps in this field and supported the creation of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, and we deem it appropriate that such efforts be continued.
 I believe that today, on the eve of the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations, we are all adopting this very approach in evaluating the Organization's past, present and future.
 In this context, I should like to note with gratitude the great efforts of the Preparatory Committee and the Secretariat in respect of the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations.
 They are making a concrete contribution to the commemoration of this forthcoming historic event.
 Kazakhstan too is preparing to commemorate the event in a fitting way.
 The importance that Kazakhstan attaches to the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations is reflected also in our initiative concerning the holding of a special session of the General Assembly within the framework of the event.
 In our view, this could be the occasion for a thorough, useful and interesting exchange of views on the most significant aspects of the activities of the United Nations and on it's role.
 The forthcoming anniversary inevitably brings to mind another historic international date the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War.
 In conclusion, I should like to express my firm belief that the United Nations will come to its anniversary revitalized and fully able to realize the rich potential embodied in the aspiration to peace and humanism that was enshrined in its Charter 50 years ago.
 The President: I now call on Mali's Minister for Foreign Affairs, for Malians Living Abroad and for African Integration, Her Excellency Mrs. Sy Kadiatou Sow.
 It also attests to the confidence of all delegations in him.
 They are confident that he will lead our work effectively and wisely.
 He can rely on the full cooperation of the Malian delegation.
 We convey to him our warmest congratulations and every good wish for success.
 I also take pleasure in greeting the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and in commending him for his tireless efforts to strengthen the role of the United Nations.
 That event, which puts an end to three centuries of domination, marks the completion of Africa's liberation.
 But, in addition, by enabling majority rule to prevail, it brings South Africa into harmony with mankind's essential values.
 For both these reasons we must welcome the fact that joint efforts, in Africa and around the world, were a powerful catalyst in the eradication of the policy of apartheid.
 The Malian Government welcomes the conclusion and the signing by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization of the Peace Agreement on the autonomy of Jericho and Gaza, which constitutes a significant step forward towards settling the Palestinian question.
 My delegation will continue to support the peace process in the interests of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, because it provides a unique framework within which to bring lasting peace, stability and security to the whole region.
 While developments in South Africa and in the Middle East amount to significant progress towards peace, certain remaining conflicts are a continuing source of grave concern for the international community.
 Any conflict capable of destabilizing any region of the world is a threat to the peace and stability of the whole international community.
 To increase the chances of resolving conflicts that have worldwide repercussions the United Nations should resolutely support regional and subregional initiatives, such as the establishment by the Organization of African Unity of a central body for the prevention, management and settlement of conflicts.
 But such initiatives need to be backed up with genuine and forthright involvement by States in the same subregion, as well as by consistent support from the international community, if lasting peace is to be brought to the areas concerned.
 Is it not also time to collectively address one of the factors underlying the development of armed conflicts in some regions of the world? I am thinking of the massive uncontrolled circulation of small arms in third world countries in general, and of Africa in particular.
 We are all aware that very few of these countries manufacture arms.
 So where do they come from? How are they channelled? What can we do about them?
 In the view of my delegation, the answer to these pressing questions would make it possible to find ways and means to ensure that our peoples enjoy a safe and stable environment that will favour development activities.
 Returning now to existing conflicts, we believe that in Rwanda everything must be done to promote dialogue in order to preserve peace in that country and in the region.
 The international community and the United Nations must continue their efforts to provide relief to the displaced populations and organize their return while stepping up economic, financial, material and technical assistance in order to foster Rwanda's reconstruction and economic rehabilitation.
 This endeavour should be accompanied by the launching of a massive and effective programme of rehabilitation, relief and reconstruction in Somalia.
 Hence the presence of the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) should be maintained and strengthened.
 In Mozambique, national reconciliation is under way.
 In Angola, we welcome the continuation of the peace talks and call on all parties to fulfil their respective commitments in order to bring peace quickly back to that country.
 In Liberia, where my country is actively involved in the search for a solution, all initiatives designed to bring lasting peace must be supported, in particular those of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
 Our abiding conviction that peace is possible everywhere should bolster our determination to bring about a settlement to other persistent conflicts.
 My country, like other countries of the international community, remains profoundly perturbed by the armed aggression and policy of ethnic cleansing being directed against the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its people.
 We must do our utmost to ensure that the relevant Security Council resolutions are fully respected.
 Another source of grave concern for the international community lies in the persistence of major economic and financial problems.
 Indeed, one of the major challenges facing our Organization today is development.
 An Agenda for Development, proposed by the Secretary-General, does provide a useful opportunity to diagnose the existing situation, in particular in Africa, and should permit us to propose appropriate measures to lay the foundations for lasting development for the benefit of all the peoples and nations of the world.
 That is why my delegation welcomes the upcoming World Summit for Social Development, scheduled for March 1995 in Copenhagen.
 Similarly, the Fourth World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in 1995, should make an important contribution to the elaboration of An Agenda for Development.
 This Conference will permit our countries to better manage the tremendous human resource represented by women by translating policies and measures in favour of women into concrete programmes.
 More social justice for women can only enhance society as a whole.
 In the same vein, my delegation welcomes the ongoing reforms in various bodies of the United Nations, notably those responsible for economic and social development.
 In this context, the agreement creating the World Trade Organization was signed in Marrakesh, Morocco, on 15 April 1994.
 Resolute political commitment on the part of the whole of the international community is thus vital if the Organization is to play the key role in the area of development and international cooperation entrusted to it by the United Nations Charter and the pertinent General Assembly resolutions.
 We welcome the fact that on 18 June 1994, the International Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, was adopted.
 Mali, a country that has been hard hit by the cumulative effects of drought and desertification, is hoping for the early ratification and implementation of this Convention.
 Let us equip this Organization with the means to accomplish these tasks.
 While the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary provides a useful opportunity to assess the work accomplished thus far, it is also a reminder of the limits that reality has imposed on the implementation of the Charter.
 In this respect, it is not simply the problem of the Organization's financial situation that arises, but also its Members' ability to agree on its priorities and its tasks that is being questioned.
 In political terms, democracy is daily being further consolidated and expanded.
 After free and democratic elections in 1992 we set up the institutions provided for by our Basic Law.
 My Government today is striving to educate the whole of Malian society in democracy.
 Evidence of this is the recent regional consultation meetings which permitted the whole population in their respective regions to voice their views on the major concerns facing the Malian nation.
 Government's new economic policy also stresses the promotion of the private sector.
 The challenges that face us are daunting and hence our achievements still need to be consolidated; but that will be possible with the support of the international community.
 These qualitative changes in Mali have also been observed in several developing countries.
 They reflect the fundamental aspiration of peoples to freedom, justice and development with solidarity.
 These positive developments, if they are to be consolidated, require a series of complementary measures at the international level.
 It is my hope that the commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the Organization will provide a useful opportunity to reflect in depth on these issues.
 The President (interpretation from French): The Assembly will first hear an address by the Sultan and Yang Di Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam.
 His Majesty Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu'Izzaddin Waddaulah: My congratulations, Mr. President, on your election to this high office. You are well known in United Nations circles and your election is a tribute to your country, Ce d'Ivoire, and to you.
 May I also congratulate Ambassador Insanally and thank him for his great contribution.
 We are proud that a fellow member of the Commonwealth has served the United Nations with such skill and distinction.
 We have long admired the courageous leadership of President Mandela in his country's struggle for freedom.
 He now faces equally great challenges in rebuilding South Africa.
 We wish him success.
 I must also congratulate the people of Palestine on their courage and vision in signing the historic Peace Agreements.
 The people of Palestine also face the challenge of putting their painful past behind them and of building a peaceful and prosperous future.
 To succeed they will need the support of the international community and the United Nations.
 In our region the people of Cambodia are also struggling to build a new future.
 The United Nations played a crucial role in Cambodia, but some obstacles remain.
 My country supports the efforts of King Norodom Sihanouk and his Government to rebuild and reunite Cambodia.
 We wish them success.
 The challenge is how to increase economic cooperation through more trade and investment.
 The world now needs a stable international environment to allow this to happen.
 We must resist the trend towards protectionism.
 One way to reduce the drain on United Nations resources is for regional organizations to work with the United Nations in accordance with Chapter VIII of its Charter.
 We may not have fully used the potential of Chapter VIII.
 As the Secretary-General has pointed out, regional arrangements can help to reduce the burden on the United Nations.
 The United Nations takes the primary responsibility for international peace and security, but regional organizations such as the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) can reduce its load through preventive diplomacy and regional economic cooperation.
 Of course, there are many regional organizations; every region has its own.
 If we are to realize the potential of Chapter VIII, we need fresh approaches to regional arrangements.
 Regional organizations must be realistic in their goals.
 They have to build a framework for cooperation which suits their conditions.
 ASEAN, of which Brunei is a member, has achieved some success.
 We do not have set institutions and legal undertakings, as does the European Union.
 Our aim is more modest.
 We seek to foster a culture of cooperation.
 Through consultation, consensus and cooperation, we have been able to contain, resolve or reduce our differences.
 We have concentrated on working together for our common interests.
 This is a process of enlarging a set of shared values.
 Cooperation is not the result of formal agreements but comes from a strong sense of common purpose.
 We are not without our problems.
 Most ASEAN countries have unresolved territorial questions with one another.
 Sensitive questions of ethnicity, culture and religion are often involved in our relations with each other.
 We do not deny the existence of these issues, but we continue to work together wherever we can.
 It took ASEAN a quarter of a century, from 1967 to 1992, to establish habits of close cooperation and consultation.
 We are now discussing how we can speed up AFTA and complete it within 10 years.
 We have also formed a number of growth triangles straddling the adjacent territories of three or more member countries.
 ASEAN is well aware of its own limits and limitations.
 ASEAN does not exist in a vacuum.
 We could not have succeeded without a favourable international environment.
 Otherwise, we would have failed.
 We will and must continue to work closely with the United Nations.
 All regional institutions need the over-arching framework of the United Nations.
 Our goal is an ASEAN of all South-East Asian countries.
 We are gradually creating what can be loosely described as a culture of peace and security in South-East Asia.
 We hope to extend it by linking up with other regional organizations in the Asia-Pacific region.
 ASEAN wants to engage all the major Powers in a pattern of constructive relations throughout the Asia-Pacific region.
 The ASEAN Regional Forum, inaugurated in Bangkok in July, brings together all major and middle-sized Powers - the United States, Japan, the European Union, China, Russia, Canada, Australia, South Korea and New Zealand - in a common framework.
 We want the United Nations and all major Powers to associate themselves with ASEAN's Treaty of Amity and Cooperation.
 It is an appropriate occasion for us to rethink how we can strengthen the United Nations system to enable it to face successfully the challenges of the twenty-first century.
 Your election also constitutes a solemn tribute to your fraternal, friendly country, Ce d'Ivoire, for its important role in the concert of nations and its firm determination to contribute to the steady strengthening of cooperation.
 We wish to assure you that the Rwandese delegation will spare no effort to make its modest contribution to the success of your task.
 That country has honoured democratic ideals by abolishing the odious system of apartheid.
 To be sure, the arrival of a united, democratic and non-racial South Africa by means of free and democratic elections deserves to be hailed from the rostrum of this Assembly.
 The history of our links is well known.
 It will be recalled that just after the beginning of this century Rwanda was placed under the mandate system and, later, under the trusteeship system, which then led to its independence.
 This history, as has been witnessed by the international community, is riddled with unfortunate events, the most recent of which is the genocide Rwanda has just experienced.
 That ideology, which was publicly professed by the public authorities - more precisely, by the National Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND) and the Coalition for the Defence of the Republic (CDR) parties of the late President Habyarimana - cleared the way for genocide.
 Plans for extermination were being openly prepared for a long time, with no trepidation whatsoever, since the power structure had long before institutionalized the violation of fundamental human rights.
 This is why armed opposition, in the form of the Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF), confronted the regime beginning in 1990.
 Some opposition parties also emerged in 1991, thanks to the pressure exerted by the RPF.
 We take this opportunity to thank all for their tireless efforts to ensure that the Arusha negotiations would succeed.
 The international community witnessed the intransigence of the MRND-CDR regime, which, describing the Agreement as a mere scrap of paper, hatched a plan for extermination, now recognized by the whole world as genocide. The international cameras trained on this barbaric crime revealed moments of rare cruelty.
 The militia, trained by the MRND and the CDR and supported by the presidential guard and by other sectors of the army, slit the throats of women, elderly people, men and children.
 The Rwandese countryside was strewn with corpses. Our rivers swept thousands of dead bodies downstream.
 Churches and schools became veritable slaughterhouses, and even now they smell of human flesh, the flesh of thousands of innocent people who had hoped to find refuge there. Piled into common graves, the victims of April's madness number thousands upon thousands.
 The killing in our country was intended to disintegrate the Rwandese people, and it succeeded.
 We must give them a common hope and a common destiny, which, after all that has happened, has become a difficult yet indispensable task.
 There would have been no genocide if the MRND-CDR system had abided by the spirit of Arusha.
 But they could not embrace the spirit of Arusha because those Rwandese Nazis were proponents of the final solution: extermination.
 They flouted morality, common sense, the values everyone in this Assembly believes in and, above all, the prescriptions of Arusha.
 Yet some who are insensitive to our suffering have asked that those Nazi parties still be allowed to hold power.
 Never in history has such a scandalous privilege been sought for the organized perpetrators of similar cases of genocide.
 Such requests make light of our dignity as human beings.
 We cannot agree to these requests, which fly in the face of the spirit and the letter of the principles underlying this institution - that is, fundamental human rights.
 By discouraging impulses towards revenge and in anticipation of justice that will be clear to everyone and that is supported by the international community, our Government has been able to contain a situation marked - understandably after such tragedy - by tensions and rancour.
 Our Government continues to cooperate closely with the United Nations Force, and to facilitate its work. With scanty means, our Government has undertaken to rebuild a country that has been socially splintered and morally and physically ravaged.
 This unspeakable barbarism, this genocide was carried out before the very eyes of the international community.
 We regret that their mandate prevented them from acting effectively at the moment of the tragedy.
 Based on this experience, we encourage the United Nations to furnish the international tribunal to be created in Rwanda with the means to function as it should, in order to spare us further disappointments and tragedies.
 In accordance with Rwanda's request, and following Mr. Degnisegui's report, as well as that of the Commission of Experts established by Security Council resolution 935 (1994), of 1 July 1994, it is absolutely urgent that this international tribunal be established.
 It will enable us to prosecute in a completely open setting those responsible for the genocide.
 Moreover, the very nature of the events - considered to be crimes against humanity - warrants the international community's joining forces to prevent their reoccurrence.
 It is now six months since the first crimes were committed, and action must be initiated.
 The delay in starting trials causes understandable frustration on the part of victims who are already losing hope that there can be a just society and who tend to view the relative impunity of the criminals as indicating approval of their crimes.
 The Rwandese refugees can be classified into two categories: the former refugees to whom the dictatorial power had refused to grant the right to return to their homeland, and the more recent ones who fled Rwanda following the events to which I have already referred.
 It is our Government's policy to encourage all refugees, without distinction, to return to their country.
 Thousands of them have already returned to their homeland, but many others remain abroad.
 We are also calling upon the soldiers to come back and, if they still desire to do so - to continue their careers in the Rwandese army.
 For Rwanda is their country; it belongs equally, and unquestionably, to all of its daughters and all its sons, with its limitations and its history, including this most recent tragedy which we must all bear.
 The unrestricted deployment of UNAMIR as well as other human rights observers should reassure the world, and especially the refugees, of our Government's determination to respect the state of law.
 Concrete steps have been taken, but much remains to be done if the world is to be completely rid of these weapons which in the past caused serious tensions in various parts of the world that degenerated into armed conflicts.
 Even though the relaxation of East-West tensions has contributed greatly to the resolution of certain conflicts, particularly in Indo-China, Latin America and the Middle East, elsewhere - in the former Yugoslavia and some African countries - the fires regrettably continue to burn.
 Our country is a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and we reiterate our full dedication to the international community's goals with regard to disarmament and arms control.
 Although genuine progress has been made in the area of disarmament, the new world order remains compromised by the constantly growing gap between the poorer and richer countries.
 In the light of the two United Nations publications on the world economic and social situation for the years 1993 and 1994, current economic trends in the world point to gloomy forecasts in the short and medium term, particularly for many third-world countries.
 The Rwandese delegation hopes that this forty-ninth session will reaffirm the importance and the still current validity of the Declaration on International Economic Cooperation, in particular the Revitalization of Economic Growth and of Development of the Developing Countries.
 We solemnly invite the forty-ninth session of the United Nations General Assembly to address the fundamental right to development, as stated in the Vienna Declaration and adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights, as well as the link between peace and development.
 Respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and development are interdependent and mutually reinforcing.
 It is imperative for the United Nations - whose main objective remains the promotion of peace, security and development - to devote itself to activities in keeping with the attainment of peace, security and development.
 In the fifty years since the signing of the San Francisco Charter, the world has undergone many changes.
 New Powers have arisen, the geopolitical map has shifted, Africa and other third-world countries have emancipated themselves, the cold war has ended - hence we must reassess our Organization to ensure that it can meet the new challenges.
 With regard to this very important organ of the United Nations system, the Rwandese delegation considers that membership, both permanent and non-permanent, should be expanded, with scrupulous attention to equitable geographic representation and bearing in mind the desire to maintain efficiency.
 One hopes that the new configuration of the Security Council will reflect the principle of equality among all Member States, and that this reform will respect the rules of democracy and transparency.
 May I conclude by stating before the community of nations that members represent that the task we have set ourselves is enormous, but the will and determination of the Rwandese people to build a new society is unflinching.
 To all those Rwandese who became victims of the machine of genocide and recent massacres, we share your deep wounds and reiterate our determination to bring the culprits to justice.
 To those Rwandese who were blindly manipulated to join the bankrupt politics of division and suppression, we call upon you to come back to your senses and join us in building a new society based on tolerance and reconciliation.
 Its role in helping us to pick up the pieces of the completely shattered fabric of our society need not be emphasized.
 We share this moral duty, it being understood that the major part of the burden by far rests on the Rwandese people themselves.
 The President (interpretation from French): The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Madagascar, His Excellency Mr. Jacques Sylla, on whom I now call.
 Mr. Sylla (Madagascar) (interpretation from French): On behalf of the delegation of Madagascar, may I congratulate you most sincerely on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 You assumption of this important post brings pride and hope to Africa, which sees this session as a special opportunity for drawing the international community's attention to the economic and social problems it has been facing in recent years.
 To them also I address my congratulations.
 I also wish to pay tribute to your distinguished predecessor, Ambassador Samuel Insanally, who so ably and in so masterly a fashion presided over the Assembly at its forty-eighth session.
 In this new era in international relations the world faces two contradictory situations: one, unforgettable pictures of national reconciliation and faith in the future, the other, a vision of the horror of peoples and nations ripping each other apart, even to the extent of annihilating one another.
 The actual progress made in ways of handling and settling certain disputes nevertheless strengthens our belief in the principles and covenants set forth in the Charter of our Organization.
 For example, we welcome the encouraging developments in Mozambique, which is now about to hold its first multiparty elections.
 Similarly, the negotiations in Lusaka between the Angolan Government and UNITA are beginning to bear fruit.
 Moreover, the clear efforts by those involved to smooth out the difficulties of applying the settlement plan in Western Sahara give us grounds for some optimism about the outcome of that dispute.
 With the same end in mind, Madagascar hopes there will be a peaceful settlement, on the basis of Security Council resolutions, of the problems between Kuwait and Iraq, with a view to establishing a mutually beneficial atmosphere of security and cooperation in the region.
 The much-acclaimed return of a united, non-racial and democratic South Africa to the community of nations is one of the major events of the last decade of this century and a subject of enormous pride for us all.
 Madagascar welcomes the establishment of a non-racial regime in that great country and firmly believes that reorganizing South Africa on a democratic basis opens up new prospects for cooperation and development throughout the region.
 Thanks to the political courage of the Israeli, Palestinian and Jordanian leaders, the Middle East has now begun a process of historic reconciliation that seemed impossible just a short time ago.
 The Malagasy Government is following closely the ups and downs of the implementation of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements in Gaza and Jericho signed by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Agreement between Israel and Jordan on the Common Agenda.
 With the disappearance of a world balance based on fear of a nuclear holocaust there came hope for a world free from the scourge of war and favourable to the strengthening of international cooperation.
 Several countries are now plunged in fratricidal wars resulting in human tragedy and political chaos.
 Somalia, Liberia, Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia are tragic and dangerous situations which threaten not only the equilibrium of their regions but also international peace and security.
 Other situations which are too often ignored could degenerate into serious crises.
 The problem of borders in central and eastern Europe, the disturbing situation in the Indian subcontinent and the flow of refugees in Africa, Asia and even in Europe are all situations that show how fragile international security is.
 The efforts on the part of the United Nations to resolve regional and subregional disputes must be supported by greater world-wide cooperation in disarmament.
 My delegation hopes that the consensus at the last session on multilateral negotiations on a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty will lead to the conclusion of a universal treaty so as to improve the prospects for the 1995 Conference of parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
 Lessons can be learned from the difficulties encountered in Somalia, the tragedy of Rwanda, and the sorry experience of the former Yugoslavia.
 Those United Nations missions that were to some extent successful benefitted from the following factors: broad support from the international community; the consent of the parties to the dispute; and non-violent and impartial intervention forces.
 A peace-keeping operation per se should be accompanied by diplomatic efforts and economic and social assistance and should also tackle the underlying causes of the conflict.
 In any event, preventive diplomacy is the best means of averting the eruption of potential conflicts.
 After all, who is better placed than the States of a region to react to a potential threat there, particularly if the region already has an adequate structure for the prevention of conflicts?
 Examples of this are the system of collective security in Europe and the mechanism for the prevention, management and settlement of disputes in Africa.
 Yet this Organization should not just unload its problems on to regional mechanisms; rather, it should offer.................... those mechanisms the necessary support by providing a clear and precise mandate and by making adequate financial and logistic resources available.
 Never before have circumstances been so favourable for realizing the aspiration of the majority of Members of this Organization to an enlarged Security Council that provides equitable representation.
 Many proposals concerning this topic are now being discussed by the General Assembly's Open-Ended Working Group.
 Madagascar, which, as is demonstrated by its Constitution, is deeply committed to democratic principles, believes that the democracy that is advocated in many countries should apply in the international system too.
 At the same time, we emphasize the need for democratic representation reflecting contemporary realities.
 However, any reform that is undertaken should win the support of all Member States so that they will have the necessary trust in it and be able to participate effectively and on an equal footing.
 The same principles apply to development problems, in that political stability at the national, regional and international levels determines whether development objectives can be met.
 There can be no peace without development, as can be seen in various parts of the world where serious conflicts and political troubles have been caused by economic hardship.
 Against this backdrop, the imperative of the universality of peace and development forcefully tells us to take note of how the world economic situation is developing.
 The crisis that has affected the world economy for more than a decade is worsening, despite a slow and fragile recovery in some developed countries.
 The gap between North and South grows wider while the inequalities between the regions become increasingly striking.
 Alongside this crisis, a serious change is taking place at the cost of developing countries, particularly poor countries.
 Equally, there is talk of the interdependence of problems but sectoral approaches alone are still used.
 Economies in the industrialized countries are becoming increasingly integrated, while we note increasing marginalization of the economies of the poor countries.
 While the industrialized countries increase their independence in raw materials through the development of micro-electronics, the developing countries are suffering the backlash, and their already-fragile economic position is being weakened further.
 These are new challenges that we have to take up in the international arena.
 Faced with these paradoxes and contradictions, which keep us deadlocked, and with economic stagnation in third-world countries, we have to ask how we can get out of this situation.
 It is clear that only by combining our efforts at all levels - national, regional and international - shall we be able to produce a lasting solution.
 Thus diplomacy is put at the service of development and, without any ideological considerations, is focused on the establishment of relations with all States on the basis of respect for the great fundamental principles set forth in the various international legal instruments.
 While continuing to implement its structural-adjustment programme, Madagascar has made important political changes in the shape of democratization, characterized by the blossoming of a multi-party approach and the creation of the conditions necessary to the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
 This democratization of our political life is accompanied by economic reform based on liberalism designed to promote active participation by our people in the development of the country.
 In this context, our Government is trying to create a climate of trust in our institutional framework, and we are trying to draw up clear rules for production and investment in order to guarantee the necessary political support at the national and international levels.
 When we use the term "immediate needs," we are thinking of a set of relief mechanisms designed to deal with the precarious situation of our principal social sectors because of the demands of the structural adjustment programme.
 It is our ardent hope that, above and beyond their current demands for adjustments to achieve financial equilibrium and balanced budgets, those institutions will take new measures to reorient that programme towards true recovery accompanied by an economic take-off and sustainable development.
 At the regional level, developing countries have come up with guidelines and goals and have now buckled down to implementing them.
 In the case of Africa, I would recall the Lagos Plan of Action and Final Act, the African Alternative Framework for Structural Adjustment Programmes (AAF-SAP) and the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s.
 Because of their own efforts to implement measures for rehabilitation and recovery, often involving considerable sacrifices, the African countries deserve a more positive response from the international community.
 In other words, it is very important to define new strategies and agree on new parameters and mechanisms that can reverse the inequities in international economic relations today.
 The Agenda for Development, the indispensable corollary to the Agenda for Peace, launched two years ago by the Secretary-General, should give to the international community new guidelines as it seeks to attain development objectives.
 The Agenda's first objectives should be to eliminate poverty, meet peoples' basic needs and improve their standard of living.
 It should seek to promote effective implementation of existing commitments and agreements and take into account the goals of forthcoming international conferences in the field of economic and social development.
 Instead of talking about requirements or conditions, it should set forth practical and realistic ways of meeting the challenges with which we are faced.
 In this connection, the attention of the international community should be focused on questions of debt, development financing, commodities, international trade, environment and development.
 Support for economic and technical cooperation between developing countries and the strengthening of regional and sub-regional integration initiatives should be an integral part of the new Agenda.
 Experience has shown the resumption of development through renewed international cooperation cannot succeed without the political will of States, especially the rich ones.
 Although such cooperation depends on many variables, and is affected by many different circumstances, it can no longer disregard the principles of justice, equity and equal but differentiated participation.
 At this crucial moment in its history, the Organization must learn from the past so that it can consolidate its achievements, meet today's challenges and develop a plan for the future of the United Nations.
 Efforts to restructure the Organization and give it a second wind will be successful only if there is a true resolve to arrive at a world consensus for development, in all its aspects, as the foundation of peace and a source of hope for all mankind.
 For its part, Madagascar is prepared to work with peace-loving and justice-loving States to build a better world.
 Mr. Drnovsek (Slovenia): Please allow me to congratulate you, Sir, and Ce d'Ivoire on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Our deliberations under your presidency are certain to be a success.
 Democracy has been restored to much of the world, thus not only showing that it is the most suitable model of government, but also making possible a greater degree of international cooperation, strengthening the rule of international law and giving the United Nations a more powerful role.
 In Eastern Europe, the process of democratic change is now irreversible.
 Though much is made of the dangers of new ethnic conflicts and the rise of new ultra-nationalistic and totalitarian forces, they become ever less likely to succeed with each day that passes.
 Have we not seen two of the most apparently intractable problems - the Middle East and South Africa - brought to a peaceful conclusion? The Middle East was a crucible of conflict; apartheid in South Africa was a disgrace to the entire human race.
 Mr. de Klerk and Mr. Mandela showed both political wisdom and human tolerance in agreeing on a transition for the Republic of South Africa.
 South Africa will play a major role in future developments in the African continent.
 But optimism does not mean expecting that all our crises will simply resolve themselves without any action on our part.
 If our collective hopes and desires are to lead anywhere, then the work must begin here at the United Nations, where representatives from the entire world are gathered.
 The time has come when we can make this world a better place to live.
 Never has the desire for cooperation between nations so clearly superseded the wish for the domination of one nation by another.
 All of these factors are predispositions for a greater role for the United Nations, and we must do everything to ensure that the mechanisms of the United Nations work more effectively.
 A measured, realistic expansion of the composition of the Council would be appropriate.
 Furthermore, Slovenia supports the proposal that Germany and Japan become permanent members of the Council.
 Last, but not least, it is important to do as much as possible to strengthen the United Nations financially, even though the finance ministers in each and every Member country find that their contributions to the United Nations are a significant component of their State budget.
 Though some may be sceptical about the results of these Conferences, my feeling is that they have contributed significantly towards a global consensus and have involved a whole new constituency in our work.
 The maintenance of international peace and security is enshrined in the United Nations Charter as the main purpose of the Organization.
 The variety and complexity of United Nations military and related activities have developed far beyond what was once defined as "peace-keeping".
 Careful reflection is needed on future directions to be taken.
 Slovenia welcomes the Secretary-General's current efforts to develop a system of stand-by forces and is ready to participate in these efforts.
 With respect to conventional weapons, we support the United States initiative for the conclusion of an agreement to reduce the number and availability of anti-personnel land-mines.
 In short, the issues of disarmament ought to remain high among the priorities of the United Nations agenda.
 Here again we believe that prevention is better than cure, and that appropriate international action is necessary in order to prevent situations characterized by violations of human rights.
 The armed conflicts in the Balkans are among the most difficult situations. Slovenia is the only successor State of the now-disintegrated former Yugoslavia which is not directly threatened by the ongoing conflict in that region.
 The horrors of war against ordinary citizens, mass violations of human rights and breaches of the United Nations Charter first in the Republic of Croatia and now in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina cause serious concern to the entire international community.
 I will not be telling Members anything new when I say that the international community was not prepared for the eruption of the crisis that occurred within the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
 Unfortunately, the conflict that was subsequently to occur within Bosnia and Herzegovina has seriously damaged the image and credibility of the United Nations.
 It is true that without the involvement of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), working in conjunction with many humanitarian organizations, the tragedy in Bosnia would have been even worse.
 But humanitarian assistance alone cannot be considered as a substitute for effective policy.
 Such achievements as the Washington Agreement, concluded between the Bosnian Muslims and Croats, do at least raise some hope that appropriate international assistance can meaningfully influence the political aspects of the conflict.
 Nevertheless, the continuation of the militant behaviour by the Bosnian Serbs maintains the need for the option of lifting of the arms embargo against the legitimate Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to remain on the agenda.
 I would like to end this sad chapter of my address with a warning.
 We should by no means forget that the terrifying pattern of "ethnic cleansing" has been patented in the conflicts that have occurred across the territories of several successor States of the former Yugoslavia.
 I speak for a country which has the good fortune not to be a problem, but a country which seeks solutions.
 The transformation and reform of our economy has gone hand-in-hand with the rapid growth of our democratic institutions.
 Slovenia is a member of the Council of Europe; we have signed the Partnership for Peace and the Pact of Stability; Slovenia is a factor of stability in Europe and strives to be an active part of Europe's integration.
 Europe may have high levels of prosperity and deeply rooted democracies and it may be one of the most stable regions in the world, but the ghosts of the past and leanings towards near-forgotten forms of nationalistic chauvinism are still with us.
 These are in direct contradiction to the very idea of a cooperative and multicultural Europe; they endanger the processes of integration.
 In closing, allow me to express Slovenia's great satisfaction that our proposal that the moral and ethical aspects of social developments be considered at the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen next year has been widely accepted.
 We are particularly glad that Slovenia will have the honour to host the United Nations seminar on the ethical and spiritual dimensions of social progress and development, an event to which we attach great importance.
 This ultimate objective should be borne in mind in all the United Nations endeavours.
 It is my hope that under your leadership, the Assembly will take positive steps in that direction.
 The President (interpretation from French): The next speaker is the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ecuador, His Excellency Mr. Jaime Marchan.
 I should also like to extend to Ambassador Samuel Insanally the congratulations of Ecuador on his brilliant performance during the last session.
 During these last few years, the world of international relations has undergone a swift and profound transformation.
 Bosnia, Somalia, Haiti, and Rwanda are just some of the names which now move mankind's moral conscience.
 At the same time, the historic role of the United Nations has acquired a unique and far-reaching meaning, and the near future of the planet appears linked to the directives and decisions adopted in the General Assembly and in the Security Council.
 The fact that the United Nations is about to celebrate 50 years of existence is truly pleasing, because it means that this forum of mankind has consolidated its leading role in history.
 At the same time, this anniversary leads us to reflect on ways to improve the Organization.
 This process will inevitably involve reconsidering some United Nations structures in order to adapt them to the new demands of development which will be discussed at the social summit soon to take place in Copenhagen.
 The social summit must enable nations, taking account of the many decades during which trade and financial matters have played against less developed countries, to commit themselves to more direct action to face the problems of inadequate education, illness, violence and poverty.
 The United Nations is approaching its fiftieth year at a time when building a new international order has become imperative.
 The changes on the international scene have brought about a new and growing interest in the United Nations.
 The international community turns to the Organization more often and with more confidence when it needs help in solving its problems.
 The Organization's structures must be revised and strengthened so that its responses can meet the needs that have been put to it.
 Furthermore, we have to create conditions that will provide the indispensable motivation for States, given the new circumstance of the world, to place their full trust in the International Court of Justice.
 It trusts that his difficult task will be based on the frank understanding of the international community.
 Human rights and social development are inseparable, indivisible.
 In daily reality we cannot separate respect for human rights from fair economic relations.
 As stated by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), quality of life is a subject which cannot remain at the entire mercy of the game of macroeconomic statistics.
 We developing countries are affected in our foreign trade by the gradual deterioration of the terms of exchange, a phenomenon which generates serious social consequences and which forces us to export greater volumes of raw, finished and semi-manufactured goods.
 We also face non-tariff barriers, and many other measures that block access by our products - such as bananas and flowers in the case of Ecuador - to the markets of those very developed countries where the principle of free trade is designed and developed.
 This protectionist policy contradicts the goals of general welfare sought by the international community.
 The countries of Latin America, including Ecuador, have launched a great effort of adjustment and economic restructuring which must be properly understood and which offers a framework more conducive to international cooperation and to foreign investment.
 The solution to this problem can be achieved only by international cooperation at all levels.
 The development of poor nations must depend on their own efforts, on cooperation based on smooth, effective and profoundly human mechanisms of integration.
 Therefore, we cannot and will not accept the implementation of programmes conditioned on population control and abortion, which are what Pope John Paul II has called "the culture of death".
 These are the bases that should inspire solidarity and international cooperation.
 Environmental problems, and those linked to the dangerous use of nuclear weapons, have shown that we humans are all voyaging in the same boat and that our destinies are intertwined.
 Thus, the prosperity of some cannot result from the exploitation or damage of the environment of others; the accumulation of weapons in one country is nothing but a boomerang that country is throwing at itself.
 I want to recall the words of the Constitutional President of Ecuador, Mr. Sixto Dur Ball, in this august forum, when he said:
 Inevitably, all our peoples must join forces to safeguard and restore the environment.
 In the ecological field, we have completed the stage of formulating rules and international conventions.
 Now we must join our resources and technical efforts to put those solutions into practice as soon as possible.
 Therefore, genuine transfer of clean technologies is of great importance.
 It is especially worrisome that nuclear testing for military purposes continues to be carried out.
 Ecuador condemns these tests, which damage the environment, endanger the countries of the test area and ignore the right of all the peoples to peace and security.
 Furthermore, Ecuador is worried by the fact that in the post-cold-war era some countries have attracted significant numbers of technicians and nuclear scientists in order to develop their military power.
 We believe in the need not only to extend the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, but also to improve it and establish it forever.
 At the same time, we support the declaration of new nuclear-weapon-free zones, similar to those established by the Latin American Treaty.
 Ecuador welcomes most warmly the agreements arrived at and the progress made in the Middle East in the process of establishing peace and normalizing the relations between Israel and its Arab neighbours.
 We also condemn the actions of extremist groups who, through terrorism, attempt to prevent the consolidation of peace in that important part of the world.
 We were particularly enthusiastic over the reinstatement of South Africa in this world Organization.
 With the victory over apartheid one of the United Nations longest and most difficult struggles has now come to an end.
 We must however reiterate our profound concern over the ongoing ethnic and religious clashes in the territories of the former Yugoslavia.
 Ecuador supports the actions taken by the international community in seeking a political solution that would ensure an end to the tragedy in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 Recently, there has been a proliferation of United Nations peace-keeping operations.
 The road to peace lies through programmes to provide help in practical and urgent terms, to those countries most affected by hunger and extreme poverty.
 The fundamental obligation of the United Nations - one might even say its real raison d'\x{76bb}re - is not only the maintenance of international peace and security but also the raising of the economic, social and cultural standards of peoples.
 This is the only solid basis for progress and development.
 I believe it is time for this Assembly to adopt pragmatic resolutions so that we may spend less on paper and bureaucracy and more on technical and cultural missions and specific programmes that would reach those people that face the greatest problems, areas afflicted by war, plague and starvation.
 Ecuador trusts that democracy will be established permanently and as soon as possible in Haiti.
 To that end, it is offered all the diplomatic and political support that it can.
 At the same time, we would wish to participate in the humanitarian efforts to contribute to the rebuilding of the Haitian economy, once constitutional order is restored.
 Ecuador would also be in favour of continuing the Cuban-American dialogue in that same constructive spirit and with good will.
 In keeping with our constant desire to contribute to a climate of peace, understanding and cooperation among peoples, Ecuador has been seeking some means of dealing with its age-old controversy with Peru and strengthening its ties of friendship and cooperation between the peoples of Ecuador and Peru.
 As we said earlier, Ecuador attaches very special importance within this process, to the intervention of His Holiness the Pope, in seeking a definitive solution to this problem.
 It is increasingly clear to our two nations that the way to development is to be found in working together in harmony.
 We wish to deepen and broaden our far-reaching common interests.
 This is to the mutual benefit of our two countries and would enable us to become efficient partners as we develop together.
 All the nations represented in this Assembly are called upon to build a better world, a world free from the horrors of war, hunger and environmental destruction.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Namibia, His Excellency Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab.
 Mr. Gurirab (Namibia): On behalf of the Namibian delegation, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your unanimous election as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 As a distinguished diplomat and public servant with long experience, you bring to your office an outstanding record of wisdom, excellence and industry.
 On a personal note, I take great pride in your brilliant election and extend best wishes to you.
 During his term of office, your distinguished predecessor, Ambassador Samuel Insanally of Guyana, introduced practical steps aimed at enhancing the work of the General Assembly and promoting further our common endeavours towards peace, partnership, development and prosperity.
 Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our illustrious Secretary-General, has always kept his plate full in the service of our Organization and its Charter.
 He has also, on a continuous basis, kept intensifying his tireless efforts in furtherance of world peace and security and, not least, development and regional conflict management and resolution.
 The Secretary-General's report "An Agenda for Development" is an important and timely complement to "An Agenda for Peace".
 I can assure the Secretary-General that he can count on Namibia's support in the discharge of his mandate.
 Following our independence, the Government and the people of Namibia strongly felt that the decolonization of our country was not complete because parts of our national territory still remained under colonial occupation.
 Since then, I have kept the international community abreast of the negotiations to this end between the Governments of Namibia and South Africa.
 In 1992, I reported on the establishment of the Joint Administrative Authority, and last year I announced the agreed date for the reintegration.
 At this point let me reiterate what I said then, that a successful resolution of this issue will not only consolidate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country but will also create enormous opportunity for economic integration, community- building and prosperity for the SADC region.
 New vistas for trade, transport and communication would be opened up throughout southern Africa.
 And this will further stimulate free movement of goods, services and people in the area.
 It is a truism that peace, democracy, political stability and good governance are among the basic pillars for development.
 The southern African region presents a good example of transformation from war, conflicts, economic destabilization, political instability, social disintegration, suppression and denial of human rights to the new situation of peace, democracy, stability, regional cooperation and hope for a more prosperous future for us all.
 The front-line States, with vigour and determination, also pursued the fight for liberation, peace, political stability, democratization and promotion and protection of human rights.
 Now, with the eradication of apartheid in South Africa and the installation of the first democratically elected Government, the struggle for freedom and political emancipation in southern Africa was crowned with a gigantic victory.
 The international community, and in particular the countries and the peoples of southern Africa, celebrated this joyous event, confident in the conviction that peace had finally come to our region.
 Just as we struggled together during the apartheid era, we look forward to strengthened partnership for development and prosperity for our people and the region.
 The time for reconstruction and economic cooperation in the region has finally dawned.
 In this context, Namibia welcomes with appreciation President Clinton's announcement yesterday in Washington that the United States Government will make a substantial financial contribution to reconstruction and development in South Africa, as well as in other countries in the region.
 It is good news for us that a friend of Africa, Ambassador Andrew Young, will coordinate this programme.
 The meeting was historic and elevated the interaction and cooperative relations between the two regions to a higher political and economic level.
 The past four years have seen throughout Africa a process of free and fair elections, multi-party democracy, the protection of human rights, press freedom, the rule of law, and market-oriented economies.
 This process has taken a firm direction and produced positive results in southern Africa and in other parts of Africa.
 In 1989, successful independence elections were held which culminated in a free and independent Namibia in 1990.
 In 1991, democratic elections were held in Zambia; in 1992 free and fair elections were held in Angola, though regrettably UNITA refused to accept the results and restarted the fighting; Lesotho held multi-party democratic elections in 1993; and this year, South Africa and Malawi underwent democratic transformations.
 In October, Botswana and Mozambique will hold democratic elections.
 Multi-party democratic, presidential and parliamentary elections are scheduled in Namibia in December this year.
 Likewise, 1995 will see multi-party democratic elections in Tanzania and general elections in Zimbabwe.
 This would mean that the vision for deepening democratization, peace, prosperity and true partnership in SADC will be greatly boosted.
 In the emerging world order resulting from the end of the cold war and the victories scored by the forces of liberation, the front-line States decided that the time had come to transform themselves into a mechanism for political consultations, conflict resolution, peace and security in the SADC region.
 Through their common vision for peace and development, a task force of three Heads of State recently succeeded in peacefully redressing the attempted overthrow of the democratically elected Government of Lesotho.
 It was a first major test, and the SADC leaders rose to the occasion and defused what was potentially an explosive situation with serious consequences for the whole region.
 Africa needs to produce similar success stories, through concerted regional initiatives, in other conflict situations such as Rwanda, Burundi, Liberia, Somalia, the Sudan and others.
 To this end, Africa and the international community alike should heed the appeals for contributions to the OAU Peace Fund.
 In Namibia, we believe that once given adequate financial and human resources Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, the OAU Secretary-General, and his staff are capable of implementing expeditiously the relevant decisions of the succeeding summits of African leaders.
 The ever-increasing peace-keeping missions of the United Nations need sound financial support, if indeed peace is to be achieved and preserved.
 I therefore urge the States Members of our Organization to heed the Secretary-General's call in his current report for adequate funding for peace-keeping operations.
 Mr. Tour (Guinea-Bissau), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 It is our fervent hope that the signing of this agreement will serve as the beginning of serious negotiations to resolve all aspects of the long-standing dispute between them, in the interest of peace, trade, development and good neighbourliness.
 I made the same plea last year from here, and the latest development helps to keep my hope alive.
 Namibia enjoys excellent friendly and productive relations with both countries.
 It is in this spirit that we advocate rapprochement between them.
 We consider that in both elections and governance popular participation is a prerequisite for development and prosperity.
 At independence, however, Namibia inherited a dual economy that was based on an unequal distribution of wealth and disparity of income resulting from apartheid.
 To redress these imbalances, the Government has been pursuing prudent economic policies aimed at improving the lives of the majority of our citizens.
 The direction is clear, although the road ahead is replete with pitfalls.
 However, I must say that the Government's will and determination to succeed cannot be doubted.
 The granting by the General Assembly of the "as if" least-developed-country option to Namibia, if not the full status of least-developed country, nonetheless allowed us to lay the foundation for the reconstruction of our economic and social structures.
 In spite of the Government's best efforts in these critical areas, imbalances persist in our society.
 Using private household consumption as an indicator, preliminary survey estimates show that 50 per cent of the poorest households account for about 13 per cent of the total consumption. The richest 10 per cent of the households consume about 33 per cent.
 These social and economic sequels of the old apartheid order continue to bedevil the Government's developmental efforts.
 In accordance with our current "as if" status, and with the assistance of the World Bank, the Namibian Government is at present preparing a public expenditure review.
 The findings so far point to dramatic income disparities, in spite of the efforts by the Government that I alluded to earlier.
 This will be an enormous contribution to our determined efforts to improve the quality of life for disadvantaged Namibians.
 The United Nations is centrally placed to address the major global problems facing us.
 Its focus, however, should not be limited to the issues of peace and security.
 The other critical issues, reconstruction and development, must be given the same serious attention.
 The World Summit on Social Development, for example, must be a forum for us to renew our commitment and political will to effectively address the diverse social and economic problems.
 We must come away from Copenhagen to act; the international community this time will need to summon more courage in order to translate into action the bold decisions we shall take.
 This requires greater and systematic coordination, so as to ensure economy, efficiency and the achievement of goals we all share.
 The continued marginalization and exclusion of women from many spheres of life are a challenge to us all.
 The platform for action to be adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing next year, must therefore assure the full and equal participation of women at all levels of society.
 In recent weeks, important meetings of Ministers and officials of the African and Latin American countries have taken place in Punta del Este, Uruquay, and Brasilia, Brazil, to further advance dialogue and cooperation on issues of common interest.
 For us, Security Council reform means more than merely adding two or more industrialized permanent members.
 What is required is democracy, transparency and fair play.
 Namibia reiterates its position that the veto power is outdated and undemocratic and should be abolished.
 Equally, the General Assembly should not be allowed to lose its authority, competence and relevance in the reform process.
 Rather, it too needs further strengthening in all aspects.
 The decolonization and political emancipation of Africa cannot be declared complete without self-determination for them as well through a democratic referendum jointly supervised by the United Nations and the OAU.
 With regard to the dispute between two of our esteemed friends, India and Pakistan, on the question of Jammu and Kashmir, Namibia urges them to pursue peaceful dialogue and promote bilateral negotiations without public confrontation.
 On another issue, we are encouraged by Libya's acceptance of Security Council resolution 731 (1992) and its expressed willingness to resolve the Lockerbie crisis with the three Western Powers.
 Next year the Non-Proliferation Treaty review and extension Conference will be held.
 It goes without saying that the Conference will provide a golden opportunity for review, assessment and extension of this vital Treaty, which has so far helped to prevent nuclear war.
 Other critical issues, such as general and complete disarmament, nuclear technology, nuclear-weapon-free zones and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, also need to be discussed and resolved.
 Once there is consensus on these and other related concerns, the extension of the Treaty, limited or unlimited, can be resolved to the satisfaction of both nuclear and non-nuclear States parties.
 For us, the centre-piece of this peace process is and must remain full realization of the right of self-determination of the Palestinian people, led by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which must lead to complete nationhood.
 The world leadership of today comes largely from a generation that saw violent conflicts, the untold devastation of societies and families and shattered hopes and dreams.
 We can, on the whole, visualize peace, though it is not yet assured in all regions.
 However, the vision of peace prevails over the vision of conflicts, and we must be determined to defend it.
 That should be the gift of our time to the next century.
 The President (interpretation from French): The next speaker is the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Transitional Government of Ethiopia, Mr. Seyoum Mesfin, on whom I now call.
 Mr. Mesfin (Ethiopia): Allow me first to extend to Ambassador Amara Essy heartfelt congratulations on his unanimous election to preside over the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
 His election is a fitting tribute both to him and to his country, Ce d'Ivoire.
 While expressing our confidence in his skills and capacity to guide this session to a successful conclusion, I wish to assure him of the full cooperation of my delegation in the discharge of the heavy responsibility he has assumed.
 The recent happy events in South Africa mark a turning point in the history of Africa.
 They have opened up new vistas for fruitful economic cooperation across the African continent and have allowed the international community to be victorious over institutional racism.
 The demise of the cold war has in this regard contributed to the lifting of the thick veil that had hindered the appreciation of our interdependence.
 None of the major problems of the present world can be effectively dealt with in the absence of an approach that takes seriously the fact that we live in an interdependent world.
 It is not too early for us to assess to what extent the international community has taken advantage of new opportunities and, with the major obstacles to joint action having now been removed, how much progress the world has made in addressing the critical problems facing us.
 Some of these ostensibly affect only part of humanity, but, in fact, are directly or indirectly the problems of the international community as a whole.
 The ever-deteriorating economic and social conditions faced by the majority of the peoples in the developing world and the abject poverty in which they are condemned to live are the most critical challenge facing the world.
 The effects of this reality reverberate through all aspects of international life, and they impinge on all issues now routinely accepted as the common challenges of the international community.
 The 1980s was a lost decade, but the first half of the present one is proving to be no better.
 From Liberia to Somalia and from Rwanda to Burundi, what Africa has been witnessing in recent years is the virtual collapse, under the weight of unbearable economic and social difficulties, not only of State structures but also of traditional values and norms of social organization.
 "An Agenda for Peace" will be far from sufficient if it doe not go side by side with, and made an integral part of, "An Agenda for Development".
 In our part of the world, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) took up a huge challenge when it decided to increase its capacity by setting up a mechanism for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts.
 This is an important step that requires the effective assistance of the international community, and we are appreciative of the support already being given to the OAU by some countries.
 But we have no illusions: even if the OAU had the capacity required to carry out its mandate in preventive diplomacy, it would not necessarily be able to make substantial inroads in ensuring durable peace in the continent.
 Nor can the United Nations and the international community do any better unless the challenges faced in connection with preventive measures in the economic and social areas are taken up in the most serious manner and unless the economic and social decline of Africa is reversed.
 The bottom line is that no African country can categorically be said to be immune from the political and social consequences of the immense level of economic decline, which can be arrested only with the requisite level of international economic cooperation and development partnership.
 This approach would also allow the international community to appreciate fully actual movement, no matter how small, in the right direction towards the resolution of specific conflict situations in Africa.
 The validity of this is most clearly to be seen in the prevailing situation in Somalia.
 That view is probably the major reason for the increasing calls for the speedy withdrawal of the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM) from Somalia.
 That view is also certainly behind the latest Security Council resolution on Somalia.
 The international community's frustration at the slow pace of the national-reconciliation process and at the lack of sufficient commitment by all sides in Somalia to their responsibility to sort out their own problems as speedily as possible is also understandable, and this is also our concern.
 That the situation in Somalia today, from the point of view both of the level of armed clashes and of dialogue between Somalis of all factions, is far better than it was a year ago, or indeed a few months ago, cannot seriously be doubted.
 No one can pretend to have a ready-made solution to the problem of power-sharing in Somalia, which has been one of the major hurdles preventing national reconciliation.
 We believe that this has been a very fruitful approach.
 From his station in Mogadishu, President Meles's envoy has been maintaining very close contact with the various Somali factions.
 Our general assessment is that the trends in Somalia are encouraging and that the Somalis are taking the first hesitant steps to sort out their problems.
 At this time last year UNOSOM was engaged in heavy combat with some Somali factions, and its presence in Somalia did not enjoy universal acceptance there.
 Today, the situation has changed so dramatically that there is consensus in the country that UNOSOM should stay, one way or another, until national reconciliation is achieved.
 In the course of the negotiations, the IGADD Committee's major goal was to help the parties to identify and address the central issues that have been the sources of the conflict in the Sudan - a country characterized by religious, ethnic and racial diversity.
 Because the IGADD process induced the parties to focus on the critical issues in the conflict, positions have become well defined. The degree of polarity reflected in these positions reveals the gravity of the root causes and explains why the talks have come to deadlock.
 Thus, the IGADD peace process is at a crossroads in that the positions of the parties have hardened, and the mediators are left to choose between abandoning their efforts and developing alternative strategies in response to the crisis.
 Faced with this situation, the Ministerial Committee was compelled ultimately to refer the matter back to the IGADD Committee of Heads of State, which met recently in Nairobi.
 In this regard, the importance of the international community's input towards breaking the logjam in the IGADD peace initiative in the Sudan can hardly be underestimated.
 As we approach the end of the period of transition in Ethiopia, we can say with full confidence that we have, by and large, achieved all the major objectives set for that period.
 Until three years ago Ethiopia's name was associated with political instability and civil war.
 Today Ethiopia has not only achieved peace but also become a factor for peace in its own subregion and beyond, as is vividly demonstrated by the Ethiopian peace-keeping contingent in Rwanda.
 Moreover, we have been gratified by the recent successful elections for a Constituent Assembly, which will be convened very soon to prepare a constitution on the basis of which a general election will be held to install the first-ever democratically elected Government in the country.
 Even though Ethiopia has now started to stand on its own feet, we cannot pretend that we have even remotely begun to address the major challenges still facing us.
 But the political will to solidify grass-roots democracy will always be there, among other things because the survival of countries as diverse as Ethiopia can be ensured only on the basis of democratic governance.
 However, the linchpin of the success of democracy in Ethiopia, as is also true for all similarly situated countries, is sustainable economic growth and development.
 Citizens who see no future for themselves or for their offspring can hardly be counted on - and for understandable reasons - to be a bedrock for stable Governments, without which democracy will have little chance of flourishing.
 None the less, even in the economic sector we have made some notable gains, and our cooperation with the international financial institutions has so far been very encouraging.
 But the challenges ahead of us are immense, and we will continue to count on the support of the international community to help us put our country firmly on the path of sustainable growth and development.
 One of the major positive outcomes of the demise of the cold war has been the new confidence placed in multilateral approaches to solving the major problems faced by our interdependent world.
 The United Nations, as the finest expression of multilateralism, has thus been given a new opportunity to make a difference in the world and to spearhead the efforts of the international community for peace and development.
 Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): It is a special pleasure and honour for me to extend to my brother, Amara Essy, my delegation's warmest congratulations on his election as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 He is a highly esteemed and valued friend to many of us, and we can rest assured that his vast diplomatic and political experience, coupled with his proven leadership qualities, will guide this Assembly through a very productive and successful session.
 The Assembly is also most grateful for the exemplary and skilful manner in which Ambassador Insanally successfully conducted the affairs of the forty-eighth session during his tenure as President.
 We must also recognize the dynamic and resourceful manner in which the Secretary-General has guided the Secretariat of the United Nations during this period of momentous internal and worldwide change.
 That the ordinary citizens of the world and its many poor have a humane and sensitive advocate in the halls of power of the United Nations is a great stabilizing factor.
 We wish the Secretary-General well in his unending efforts to bring peace and development to all corners of our troubled world.
 Building upon our emphasis last year on the rights of the individual, the purview of the international community has expanded to encompass the right of the individual to a better economic and social life.
 Only by cooperating and working together to reinforce the special attributes of each can we begin to arrest the pervasive social disintegration, endemic conflict and world disorder that threaten our security and our future.
 As we review the developments of the past year in the light of the triumphs and tragedies experienced by the world body and by the international community, the picture which emerges is one of persistent conflict and pervasive poverty.
 For some, the dramatic accord between the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and Israel, negotiated entirely by the Palestinians themselves, continues to be viewed with a measure of astonishment.
 True enough, the accord will not satisfy everyone, and conditions remain on future progress, but after so many decades of having a minimal voice in their destiny and of paltry changes in their condition, the Palestinians have made the first real breakthrough towards a Palestinian State.
 Efforts towards political and democratic institutionalization and administrative refinement, accompanied by widespread political participation and empowerment, are evolving slowly and may demonstrate to the international community the level of support lent by Palestinians to the direction implied by the accords.
 The substantial international assistance pledged and envisaged to underwrite the requisite stability and progress must be forthcoming in order to meet the urgent needs of the Palestinian governing authority, and to achieve the goals of a functioning and efficient Palestinian entity.
 They have now embarked on the road to self-determination and should receive the total support of the international community.
 Under the inspiring and extraordinary leadership of President Mandela, South Africa has become an exemplary model for the international community of national reconciliation and unity.
 During the recent dramatic period in its history, South Africa was likewise fortunate to have had a visionary in the person of Mr. de Klerk, who was aware of the role of timing and recognized the need for change.
 While there have been many players in the struggle against apartheid, certainly none are more deserving of praise and recognition than the majority people of South Africa themselves.
 South Africa cannot fail to appreciate that all of Africa, and in fact the world, shares in its joy.
 We can only urge President Mandela and his country to continue to work together to advance the task of restructuring South Africa so that it truly realizes its undoubted greatness.
 By now the world is painfully aware of the fate of Rwanda, torn apart by sheer hatred and intolerance, by leaders bent upon exploiting ethnic differences for selfish gains.
 Employing all manner of fear, intimidation and propaganda, they succeeded in stirring up nearly an entire people to turn against another, until the eventual human carnage, in so compressed a time span, was no doubt unequalled in human history.
 Even now, the intransigent leadership of the millions of suffering Hutus, eking out a bare existence in the volcanic soils of eastern Zaire or the other surrounding countries, refuses to acknowledge the plight of their people, dissuading them with threats and violence from returning to their country.
 Their actions cannot be pardoned; the perpetrators of this insane episode must be brought to justice and punished.
 Otherwise, their implacable goal of rearming and returning one day to the battle field promises a long night of recurring horror for Central Africa.
 Regrettably, by paying no heed to the early signs of pending troubles, and by seeking ways to severely limit its involvement, the world body lost the opportunity to play a significant part in preventing this tragedy.
 Worse still, the difficulty in assembling and suitably equipping a United Nations peace-keeping force has not helped to instil in those who have fled the confidence needed to return, and in those who have remained the confidence needed to stay.
 All this leaves the new Government of Rwanda in the throes of a critical dilemma, requiring immeasurable soul searching.
 For a country from which nearly one-third of the population has fled - in the case of Rwanda some 2 million people - the numbers are so large and disproportionate as to deny the Government a large measure of the legitimacy it badly needs.
 Note must also be taken of the valiant efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), facing terrible odds in a situation of such frightening chaos.
 Despite its small numbers, its attempts to alleviate the suffering and protect the vulnerable undoubtedly saved many lives and provided a measure of sanity in a sea of madness.
 The world body should recognize with pride and great appreciation what has been done by the personnel of UNAMIR and its illustrious leader, General Romeo Dallaire of Canada.
 There the ominous rise in killings, coupled with the accelerating pace of rearmament, should cause extreme concern to the world community.
 With the army at the epicentre of power, and with weapons calling the shots, so to speak, government and politics could remain tense and unstable.
 This is a positive trend which we hope will manifest itself in all aspects of political, economic and social activity.
 The plights of Angola and Liberia are likewise grave; both are locked in a destructive state of shooting negotiations.
 In both, the humanitarian situation is again regressing and a cease-fire is nowhere in sight; the gun is again the preferred method of voting.
 We are pleased that the junta has deemed it unwise to oppose the world, and instead has agreed to relinquish power in order to facilitate the return of the democratically elected President, Mr. Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
 In other areas, Djibouti remains saddened by the status quo in the bilateral discussions between the two Gulf neighbours, Iran and the United Arab Emirates, concerning the three islands of Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa.
 We believe there is an urgent need for a renewed and serious effort to resolve this dispute through all possible peaceful avenues, including its referring it to the International Court of Justice.
 Despite the warning of dire consequences, the Bosnian Serbs have rejected the final compromise proposal of the five-nation Contact Group, which awards them 49 per cent of the country, over two-thirds of which they have taken by force.
 In the weeks since the rejection, nothing has been done to punish the Bosnian Serbs, as it had been intimated would be done.
 In fact, the Serbs continue to apply consistent pressure on the Bosnian Government and the United Nations, targeting Sarajevo and its airport, blocking United Nations food convoys and strangling safe areas such as Srebrenica and Gorazde.
 One shudders to think what would have happened immediately if it had been the Muslim party that had rejected the proposal.
 This inaction reflects the blatant unwillingness of the international community to take any meaningful action against the culprits, let alone punish them. This only encourages further intransigence.
 The Serb reaction to difficult situations consists in resorting to wild, radical behaviour, eliciting retreat and concessions by the peacemakers.
 One can never say what they will do tomorrow, which means their word today has no intrinsic value.
 To have rewarded Belgrade with a loosening of the sanctions in the absence of a viable and comprehensive peace agreement or concrete proof of compliance is to mistake the form of this family dispute for its substance perhaps because there is none.
 What is to be done? For too long the United Nations has sought voluntary disarmament, conferences of national reconciliation, interim government and hopefully, in the end, a government elected by the people.
 Creating pressure for this process is the looming departure of UNOSOM scheduled for 31 March 1995, when operations may be closed down.
 Although we anticipate that the people will ultimately have the final say through elections, at present it is the warlords and their factions that have been given a comprehensive veto.
 On the assumption that they are the powers that be in Somalia, considerable time has been spent attempting to gain their agreement in the hope of eventually reaching the people through them.
 But clearly the faction leaders desire the political process to stop with them without flowing through to the people.
 The obvious plan of the faction leaders is undoubtedly to induce the United Nations to believe conditions are propitious for withdrawal and then to settle scores among themselves until someone is victorious.
 Clearly, what is absent from the whole process is the voice of the people in the selection of true, legitimate leadership and government to counter the present abdication of power to bands of gun-holders.
 Solidifying these steps would then be the job of ample United Nations forces on hand, drawing upon this Organization's experience in Cambodia, Mozambique and elsewhere.
 Certainly, the thought of leaving Somalia with nothing in place and so many lives at risk is both abhorrent and unacceptable, a case where it will be interpreted that a "failed State" has been abandoned by the United Nations.
 Although I have briefly explored situations in a number of world trouble spots, the sad fact is that others appear to be gathering wind in their sails, ready to burst forth.
 But the fault can hardly be laid at the feet of the United Nations if its urgent requests for material and human resources are not met or are met slowly or inadequately.
 Such a state of affairs must be a cause for concern, as the United Nations will increasingly be forced to limit its responses to diplomatic initiatives, such as we have seen in Haiti.
 In place of classic peace-keeping, we will witness a growing reliance upon ad hoc multinational intervention, the so-called posse response, but that too has its limitations - for we are concerned with whether there is to be meaningful collective security.
 If United Nations peace-keeping withers, and in its place we are forced to rely on ad hoc interventions, then we need to ask under what basis that involvement will be forthcoming.
 In view of these developing trends, the United Nations may be forced to rely more upon simply letting conflicts run their natural course, as in Somalia.
 What this situation amply demonstrates is that the United Nations needs a well-trained, mobile, standing force with rapid deployment capability.
 It is fashionable these days to say that we live in an international world, a "global village" in which nations can no longer avoid the effects of developments in their neighbours or the world.
 For Djibouti, this fact has a particularly telling impact, for we have been forced to grapple with the effects of years of past instability, warfare and massive national disintegration in the Horn of Africa, as in Somalia at present.
 Yet, whatever the extent of our difficulties arising from these circumstances, Djibouti has steadfastly sought to remain a good-neighbourly State, contributing, to the extent permitted by our meagre resources, to regional stability and peace efforts.
 Moreover, recognizing the need to further involve the people of Djibouti in the complex process of development and governance, we have an overhauled our political structure and institutions.
 Too often, little attention too often is paid to a nation, it seems, until it is too desperate and near collapse, or until it is perceived by the international community as a source of new danger to peace and security, thereby qualifying it for aid and assistance.
 This makes little sense, and is indeed a mockery of the preventive measures that are often-mentioned but seldom instituted.
 We deserve better, but we remain quite confident that both our efforts and our urgent needs for critical resources will be recognized by our friends and development partners.
 Such is the inexorable drift of the Sahara southward, or the severe drought conditions leading to famine which now plagues the Horn.
 Overall, an estimated 20 million people are at risk in 10 countries, facing farms that are parched, rivers that are dried up, and pestilence.
 Anticipating possible mass starvation resulting from the lack of rain and water, food stocks were made ready, only to be virtually depleted by a sudden emergency elsewhere, as in Rwanda.
 Adding to the difficulties arising from natural causes, nations just as often face social forces over which they have little control.
 Domestic macro-economic policies in many industrialized countries, seeking to combat inflation or balance international payments, often have drastic effects on the demand for third-world products and on commodity prices.
 The result, as one analyst explains, is frequently declining terms of trade, sharply increased interest rates, reduced exports, massive increases in current account deficits, interest and debt-service payments, all at a time of reduced aid and other capital flows.
 External payment restraints, in particular, have affected levels of domestic production in both industrial and agricultural sectors, at times even production for export, leading to inflation, acute financial crises and mounting debt.
 Many third world countries simply lack the economic capacity and flexibility to react in the short term.
 In the long run, everyone benefits from greater coherence and efficiency in the international economic system.
 Clearly the world's economic and financial system requires much more order, predictability, coordination and fairness.
 As the most truly representative body of the world's people and States, the General Assembly needs to return to its original role as contemplated by the founding Member States and set forth in the Charter.
 It must provide a more decisive lead in strategy and policy, in reviewing, in critiquing and approving the operation of the total system.
 The Economic and Social Council must remain open to receive and address the concerns of Africa, which should not be hampered in its effective and beneficial participation in the Council and its subsidiary bodies.
 In this regard, we welcomed the Secretary General's report "An Agenda for Development" which provided the opportunity for a comprehensive review of world economic and social problems, particularly in Africa.
 For if we are to address constructively the questions of economic growth and development, of the formulation of truly beneficial international macro-economic systems, we need to begin to take those confidence- building measures that will bring the North and the South closer and strengthen the concept of partnership.
 Chairman Kpomakpor: Mr. President, I wish to join others who have spoken before me in congratulating you on your election to guide the deliberations of the forty-ninth session of the United Nations General Assembly.
 Let me also convey our gratitude to your erudite predecessor, Ambassador Samuel Insanally of Guyana, for the skilful manner in which he guided the deliberations of the last session.
 We are particularly pleased at his keen interest and involvement in the search for durable peace in Liberia.
 A manifestation of this changing situation is the growing utilization of a consensual approach to addressing such burning issues on the international agenda as human rights, population and the environment.
 The peaceful transition from apartheid to majority rule in South Africa has been of monumental significance to Africa.
 Some of these intra-State conflicts are so complex that policy makers are forced to debate the pros and cons of peace-keeping or peacemaking when the main issue should be that of saving lives, especially in those situations where a legitimate governing authority is absent.
 The result is that the international community sometimes reacts with what may amount to short-cut solutions.
 Often attempts at resolving some of these conflicts unwittingly overlook the intransigence and recalcitrance of warlords who were the ones primarily responsible for bringing untold suffering and deprivation to their own people.
 These conflicts also create lucrative opportunities for arms dealers and international supporters of warlords.
 A disturbing phenomenon associated with these conflicts is that of the child soldier.
 Children are recruited, indoctrinated and trained in the art of murder, mayhem and genocide, thus depriving a country of an entire generation of its human resources.
 This is particularly true for my own country, Liberia, where the great majority of the 60,000 combatants are children who have yet to complete their primary education.
 The forced conscription of our children the building-blocks of our future must be stopped, since it violates the Convention of the Rights of the Child.
 Therefore we should not yield to any action that has the effect of sanctioning the acquisition of power through the use of force or promoting solutions aimed at appeasing warlords at the expense of the larger unarmed population.
 The world has witnessed the rise, during the last four years, of a powerful movement for democracy and democratization.
 This movement has swept asunder some of the strongest totalitarian regimes in its wake, from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union to Latin America, Africa and Asia.
 The international community must therefore demonstrate its resolve to support this movement so that the democratic aspirations of all peoples are realized throughout the world.
 It would be an indictment of the present world leadership for it to simply watch countries become involved in these conflicts, which may have been ignited initially by the spark of democratization.
 It is against this background that we wish to briefly review the Liberian peace process.
 Since 1990, their selfless sacrifice has provided a security blanket in parts of Liberia, thus enabling us to work towards the attainment of peace in our country.
 It will be recalled that in December 1989 the Liberian situation exploded into an armed conflict, ostensibly to rid the country of military dictatorship.
 By mid-1990, however, the conflict had degenerated into a three-way struggle for power.
 The State machinery had disintegrated.
 None of the armed factions engaged in the struggle appeared capable of winning a decisive victory and establishing legitimate authority.
 In the wake of this deadly stalemate, ECOWAS intervened with a two-pronged peace plan: A peace-monitoring force would be dispatched to Liberia to provide security for the country, while the Liberians themselves would re-establish an internal civil administration to prepare the country for democratic elections.
 The ECOWAS peace-monitoring group, ECOMOG, arrived in Liberia in August 1990.
 Upon the insistence of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), a second, All-Liberia Conference was convened in Monrovia in 1991, which endorsed the Interim Government.
 Several other meetings of the warring factions were held in Banjul, Freetown, Dakar, Bamako, Lom, Yamoussoukro and Geneva, in search of peace with the armed factions.
 With remarkable success, the ECOWAS peace plan, with an interim civilian administration for Liberia and with ECOMOG, restored some degree of stability and provided a semblance of law and order in the country for a period of two years.
 The refusal of the NPFL to fully comply with the Yamoussoukro Accord gave rise to a new armed group, the United Liberation Movement of Liberia for Democracy (ULIMO), which claimed its sole purpose was to free the Liberian people from the NPFL.
 The IGNU delegation included the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL).
 The United Nations Secretary-General's Special Representative chaired the meeting, which was also attended by the OAU Eminent Person, the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS and the Field Commander of ECOMOG.
 The framework agreed upon in Geneva was formally concluded and signed by the parties in Cotonou, Republic of Benin, on 25 July 1993.
 The Liberian National Transitional Government was given the mandate to extend its authority throughout the country, to repatriate and resettle refugees from abroad, and to conduct free and fair elections within six months.
 He also assured the Liberian people that the armed factions would comply fully with the provisions of the Cotonou Agreement.
 After the seating of the Liberian National Transitional Government the military aspects of the peace process did not keep pace with the political aspects as contemplated by the Agreement.
 Moreover, it took six months for the additional troops from Tanzania and Uganda to arrive in Liberia.
 Consequently, there has been a mushrooming of armed groups.
 There are now two factions of ULIMO and two factions of NPFL. There is also the Liberian Peace Council (LPC) and the Lofa Defence Force (LDF).
 Each of the breakaway factions of ULIMO and the NPFL, together with the LPC and LDF, have joined in a coalition of forces to fight the branch of NPFL led by Mr. Charles Taylor.
 A consequence of this situation is the mass exodus of frightened citizens who have had to seek refuge and havens in neighbouring countries and a heightening of the humanitarian needs of the country.
 I come now to the Liberian National Conference.
 Realizing the current morass in the country and the uncooperative attitude of the warring factions towards the Liberian National Transitional Government, a citizens' consultative meeting was convened in Monrovia from 29 to 30 July 1994.
 At that meeting the people of Liberia determined that for the last four years the destiny of the country had been largely dictated by the warring factions and that they, the citizens, were being marginalized.
 The people of Liberia therefore decided that they must, and would, become involved in breaking the stalemate in the peace process.
 The Conference agenda included disarmament and demobilization, governance and elections.
 The consensus of the Conference was that the fundamental problem of the Liberian conflict is not governance, but, rather, the refusal of the armed groups to disarm and demobilize.
 Too much time, energy and resources and too many lives have been lost by Liberians and other West Africans to settle now for a less than honourable, just and lasting solution.
 I turn next to the Akosombo Agreement.
 A meeting of leaders of two warring factions, Mr. Charles Taylor of the NPFL and Lieutenant-General Alhaji S.G. Kromah, of ULIMO, together with the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of Liberia, Lieutenant-General J. Hezekiah Bowen, was held at Akosombo, Ghana.
 Except for General Bowen, the Liberian National Transitional Government delegation was excluded from the deliberations at Akosombo.
 On 12 September 1994, General Bowen, Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL), without authority signed the Akosombo Accord, along with the two warring leaders: Charles Taylor and Alhaji Kromah.
 The restructured LNTG would have a life-span of 16 months, with general elections slated for October 1995 and installation of the newly elected government in January 1996.
 In Liberia, the Akosombo Accord caused an outcry and widespread indignation.
 It was viewed as yet another attempt to appease the armed factional leaders whose uncompromising stance has been responsible for prolonging the conflict, causing the death of so many Liberians and bringing so much destruction and suffering upon the people.
 The Government of Liberia has therefore rejected the Akosombo Accord for a number of reasons.
 First, the Accord endeavoured to reduce the armed forces of Liberia, the constitutional army, to a warring faction.
 Secondly, it failed to address adequately the political problems disarmament and demobilization of the warring factions that have been the single most important stumbling-block to the peace process.
 There was also a failure to recognize the changing military positions of the factional leaders on the ground.
 For example, Mr. Charles Taylor of the NPFL has been unable to return to, or regain, his headquarters at Gbarnga since leaving the meeting in Ghana, because his forces have been driven out by rival factions.
 The reaction to the Akosombo Accord and the renewed outbreak of hostilities in central Liberia among the armed factions may lead some to conclude that Liberians are simply not ready for peace, but this is not so.
 We are ready for peace.
 Recent events in the country, including the failed coup attempt by dissident elements of the Armed Forces of Liberia and renewed hostilities among the warring factions, reinforce the need for effective action towards disarmament and demobilization.
 In this light, we wish to appeal to the world community to give greater support to the work of ECOMOG by providing additional logistics and resources to enable it effectively to execute its mandate under the Cotonou Agreement.
 Haiti provides a hopeful example of what can be accomplished when the international community stays the course in helping to find a peaceful solution to intra-State conflicts.
 Mr. Alassounouma (Togo) (interpretation from French): More than anyone else, Sir, you are aware of what excellent and solid relations of cooperation, friendship and fraternity have existed for many years now between your country, Ce d'Ivoire, and Togo.
 I therefore wish, on behalf of the Government of Togo, in the name of my delegation, and in my own capacity, to congratulate you most sincerely on this tribute to you and to your fraternal country, Ce d'Ivoire.
 The Togolese delegation and I myself assure you of our support.
 We are convinced that your competence and your long experience in international affairs augur well for the success of our work.
 We reiterate to him the total support of the delegation of Togo.
 My country is proud to have contributed to reversing that odious system.
 Togo has always supported the legitimate aspirations of peoples oppressed the world over, but in particular the aspirations of the black majority of South Africa, whose fundamental rights, even the most elementary among them, were long trampled.
 In 1995, our Organization will celebrate its fiftieth anniversary.
 A new era of hope lies ahead for our nations.
 The period of upheaval in which we live presents our Organization with a challenge that of understanding all the major changes that are under way and of finding rapid solutions to the many problems confronting our planet.
 This is the only way to respond to the expectations of our peoples and to respect the spirit of those who, 50 years ago, created our world Organization, with the purpose, among other things, of preventing conflicts for the peace of nations and the well-being of peoples.
 There are clear grounds for optimism when we see that the adversaries of yesterday have become the allies of today, seeking together peaceful and mutually advantageous solutions to the international problems of the day.
 We therefore have all the more reason to have faith in the future of our Organization.
 On the internal level, my country has undertaken to embark on the path of democracy based on a complete and responsible multiparty system in order to establish a State based on law and on respect for the individual.
 In spite of the end of the cold war, we see disorder constantly blurring the geopolitical landscape.
 The continent, marginalized, awakens only the minds of the most attentive observers, when, across mountains and valleys, they hear the cries of anguish and death.
 Mr. Seniloli (Fiji), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 The defeat of the system of apartheid in South Africa and the tragic events in Rwanda illustrate the two extremes in the evolution of the African continent, characterized by the contrast between hope and despair, progress and destruction.
 While, at the present time, South Africa seems to represent hope, Rwanda, on the contrary, symbolizes the face of an Africa mutilated and ravaged.
 In Liberia, despite a number of agreements, the disarmament of the factions has not yet occurred, and the general elections that it was hoped would take place seem to be becoming a mirage.
 As for Somalia, Togo appeals to the international community not to grow weary and leave that country.
 We therefore invite the parties to the conflict to refrain from contributing to discouragement and to resume real dialogue aimed at the rapid establishment of reliable national institutions.
 The Togolese Government is gratified at the recent positive development in the socio-political situation in Burundi and invites the new leaders to do all in their power to secure the definitive restoration of peace in that country.
 These encouraging developments are important steps in the direction of peace.
 They demonstrate clearly that disputes can be settled effectively only through peaceful means and that only resolute political will can help to build a peaceful society.
 As regards the future of the Palestinian people, the transition period, which is just beginning, must be sustained, not only politically but also, and above all, through financial, economic and technical assistance from the international community.
 The United Nations will therefore have to assume its responsibilities fully until the Palestinian question is definitively and satisfactorily resolved in all its aspects.
 States have been dislocated, borders have been called into question, and dreams of annexation and of ethnic cleansing inspire and haunt both minds and hearts.
 Of course, the Organization has in recent years clearly demonstrated its usefulness, especially in the fields of humanitarian affairs and the maintenance of peace.
 This being the case, it is clear that, as it makes decisions about the maintenance of international peace and security, the Security Council should be broadened and, thereby, adapted to the changes in the world of today.
 That is why we support its actions.
 Profoundly committed to peace and to the principle of general and complete disarmament, Togo rejoices in the many positive developments that have taken place in this field over recent months.
 The massive international transfers of such weapons dangerously compromise the success of effective general disarmament.
 Togo views this courageous position adopted by the North Korean party as edifying testimony of its determination to maintain peace in the region.
 The world economy continues to be characterized by trends toward stagnation and the growing disparity between North and South.
 As we prepare to enter the third millennium, the elimination of poverty should be one of the main objectives of our Organization.
 All of this leads to widespread poverty, aggravated by structural adjustment programmes that have insupportable social effects.
 It can never be overemphasized that sustainable development is a prerequisite to lasting peace.
 The right to development must be considered, henceforth, as a fundamental human right, and thus be given priority attention by the international community.
 Agenda 21 and the Rio Declaration are an important bridge on the road to sustainable development and to the protection of the Earth from the dangers facing it.
 That is why, two years ago, all the participants in the Conference showed such enthusiasm and sincerity.
 Regrettably, the results of that historic summit have still not been reflected in concrete facts.
 It is high time that States and the international community did everything in their power, at the national, regional and international levels, to put into effect the commitments to sustainable development undertaken in Rio.
 The Togolese Government welcomes the entry into force of the Framework Convention on Climate Change and is particularly delighted at the conclusion of another legal instrument of global scope: the International Convention to Combat Desertification in Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa.
 The Convention was adopted by the intergovernmental negotiating Committee in Paris in June 1994.
 Togo was pleased to take part in the negotiating process and will soon take up the procedures for signature and ratification.
 Considering the uncertain future of mankind and the numerous and formidable challenges confronting the human race, it is imperative that we become clearly aware of our moral obligations.
 The reforms under way are indispensable, but they must not become a means of conferring even greater influence than in the past on the large countries and richest Powers in the world.
 Our new awareness must also help define ways of establishing relations among nations in the future, and in dealing with our present-day concerns we must take into account the causes of the disparities in standards of living between North and South.
 Only an attitude based on action, justice and international solidarity can spare the world a conflict that would otherwise, sooner or later, be inevitable.
 Thus, tackling the deep-rooted causes of today's problems means seeking together the solutions that will make it possible for men, women and children to live decently and in complete freedom, without fear of being crushed by unemployment, poverty and hunger.
 At its forty-ninth session, may the General Assembly, under the leadership of its President, contribute to dispelling our concerns and to defining the ways and means of helping us blaze the way into the future.
 This is my delegation's most fervent hope.
 The President: I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of Jamaica, His Excellency the Honourable Paul Robertson.
 I wish to assure him of the full support and cooperation of the Jamaican delegation in the deliberations on the many important issues before the Assembly.
 We in the Caribbean are justifiably proud of his contributions to the Assembly's deliberations.
 Last year I emphasized that the international community was at a crossroads where we were faced not only with matters of economic progress but also with an environment full of conflicts and strife.
 Our most pressing collective challenge is to make this Organization a more effective instrument for peace and development.
 The United Nations is being called upon to respond to a host of new challenges, including emergency humanitarian assistance, peace-keeping, peacemaking, development and post-conflict rebuilding.
 The past year has seen human misery and dislocation of fearful proportions in Haiti, on the high seas of the Caribbean, in Rwanda, in the refugee camps of Zaire and Tanzania, in Bosnia and in Afghanistan.
 The United Nations can and should bring to these and other situations a broadly encompassing view of the indivisibility of political, economic and social processes.
 The Organization and its resources and the will and vision of its Members must be mobilized to address the imperatives of social and economic development.
 We must seek to promote a new era of international cooperation for global human security.
 It has become evident that no State by itself can control the spread of environmental degradation and pollution, transnational migrations and diseases such the AIDS epidemic.
 Globalization brings new opportunities, but it also brings new dangers.
 Despite the general trend towards improved economic management, economic disparities are widening.
 This is a matter of concern to Jamaica as we, like a large number of other developing countries, have placed high developmental priority on export-led growth and on attracting investment flows.
 Structural adjustment programmes have also been undertaken at great social cost.
 The contributions of the United Nations and its specialized agencies in areas such as institution-building, poverty alleviation, productivity enhancement, small enterprise development and financing, and the strengthening of human resources, continue to be vital elements in enhancing the productive potential of developing countries.
 This will, in turn, enable our countries to benefit more fully from and to participate more effectively in a liberal and increasingly organic global economy.
 A meaningful agenda for development must set priorities in programmes and resources that respond to the challenges posed by the international environment for developing countries.
 These priorities must address all issues to which adequate multilateral solutions have yet to be found.
 The agenda must strengthen the role of the United Nations in the area of international economic policy-making and coordination.
 I wish to emphasize that we should continue to examine the roles and policies of these institutions.
 We must make the changes that five decades of experience indicate are necessary so as to improve the prospects for growth and development of developing countries change which can be carried out without undermining the health and vitality of the international economy or the fiscal integrity of these institutions.
 Major developed countries should re-examine their opposition to the sound proposals for change that have been put forward repeatedly by developing countries proposals that range from increasing international liquidity to longer adjustment periods.
 Now is an opportune time to reassess their respective roles, given new global dynamics and changing patterns of trade and investment.
 The Fund and the Bank need to quickly adapt to the current global economic system if they are to remain relevant to contemporary realities.
 Two important conferences were held this year which offered opportunities for international attention and action.
 In Barbados, the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States adopted a programme of action which now requires the support and assistance of the United Nations system and the donor community for its speedy and effective implementation.
 The recently concluded International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo produced a landmark document highlighting the inextricable linkage between population, sustained economic growth and sustained development.
 Next year in Copenhagen, the World Summit for Social Development will endeavour to adopt a global approach to the eradication of poverty, the generation of productive employment and the enhancement of social integration.
 We will also meet in Beijing at the Fourth World Conference on Women to continue to put in place measures which will create an enabling environment for women.
 Jamaica will actively participate in these important processes.
 I have chosen to focus at the outset on what Jamaica sees as the development imperative and priorities of the United Nations because we are convinced that the path to development and the path to peace are one and the same.
 Jamaica fully supports an open, non-discriminatory trading system governed by transparent rules and with an effective mechanism for settling disputes.
 We will work actively within the new organization to ensure the promotion of development through trade, placing special importance on those provisions in the conclusions of the Uruguay Round which seek to ensure a regime of fairness and equity in the overall context of a programme of free trade.
 The international community and its institutions are dynamic.
 The choice is whether we actively shape the change that inevitably comes with the passing of time and with new circumstances, or whether we merely react to events.
 The event will mark the end of a process that began nearly twenty years ago and the opening of a new and historic chapter in international juridical and economic relations.
 It is important that the Authority receive the necessary resources to enable it to operate effectively, in a way consistent with principles and practices applied to institutions within the United Nations system.
 We invite all States to join in the momentous first meeting of the Authority in Kingston from 16 to 18 November.
 We look forward to welcoming the Secretary-General of this Organization, His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who has graciously accepted the invitation of the Government of Jamaica to be at the inaugural meeting.
 The dismantling of apartheid was a consequence of the long and valiant struggle waged by the South African people.
 It was also a victory for multilateralism and an important reminder of the critical role that multilateral organizations such as the United Nations can play in resolving difficult international issues.
 The Government and the people of Jamaica welcome a non-racial, democratic South Africa into the international community of nations.
 We welcome the most recent developments in Haiti and the reaffirmation by the international community of its commitment to the Governors Island Accord.
 Jamaica, along with several of our CARICOM partners, is playing its part in this process by participating in the multinational force and in the United Nations Mission in Haiti.
 Developments in Haiti have underscored the wisdom of the philosophy of the countries of the Caribbean that maintaining peace and stability, within the context of democratic institutions and practices, must be the fundamental basis for the development of our region.
 Within the wider Latin American and Caribbean region, we are actively strengthening and widening cooperation among our countries.
 The establishment of the Association of Caribbean States (ACS) in July of this year was a historic development that provides for even stronger collaboration and cooperation.
 We hope that in the interest of the entire region, a process of sustained dialogue and accommodation between Cuba and the United States can be initiated, and that this will lead to conditions that permit the eventual full reintegration of Cuba into the region and into the hemispheric community.
 Jamaica welcomes the call made by the Rio Group at its recent Eighth Summit meeting for the lifting of the trade embargo against Cuba.
 I feel compelled to return in these final comments to the mission of this Organization peace and development.
 There can be little cause for comfort when, since 1945, 20 million people have died in wars and other conflicts.
 It is disturbing and instructive to learn that some 80 million persons now live in foreign lands, and that a million persons immigrate permanently each year, while another million seek political asylum as they flee both poverty and internal strife.
 The increasing flows of refugees and displaced persons worldwide threaten peace and stability and exacerbate tensions and conflicts between countries and in entire regions.
 We must strengthen international cooperation in this area and streamline national and international procedures for dealing with this grave problem.
 To be true to its mission, the United Nations must be an Organization that reduces both want and war.
 This is why I underscored earlier my delegation's strong belief that this Organization must become increasingly active in the promotion of long-term development, which is the necessary underpinning of a genuine and lasting peace.
 The United Nations must not shrink from this aspect of its mission.
 The military and ideological realignment of recent years has created new opportunities for peace.
 But these unprecedented developments must be supported by institutional reforms and by new approaches on our part.
 In this regard, Jamaica fully supports the call for its enlargement.
 Expenditure on armaments continues to consume resources and to divert spending away from human development needs in both developed and developing countries.
 The United Nations has a legitimate role to play in providing technical and other assistance to help developing and other countries shift human and material resources from military to civilian use.
 We note that the permanent members of the Security Council are also the world's leading exporters of conventional weapons.
 It would be remiss of me if I concluded my contribution to this debate without referring to the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations, to be celebrated next year.
 As we all prepare for this historic occasion, we must reflect on the fact that this achievement is in itself a vindication of the principles on which the Organization was founded.
 If we are to survive beyond that milestone we must remain steadfast to these principles.
 Mr. Gatti (San Marino) (spoke in Italian; English text furnished by the delegation): I wonder how historians will judge the last decade of this century, and what future generations will read about these years.
 The installation of the administration of the Palestinian National Authority in Jericho gave us strong hope for a peaceful future.
 Let me also stress that not only should such intervention be firm, but it should also be legitimate and correct.
 In the effort to restore peace, the international community should act fairly, respecting the legitimate reasons and opposing the illegitimate ones, with all due regard for man and human dignity.
 From the top of our Mount Titano, on a clear day, one can see the coast of the former Yugoslavia.
 In the fourth century, San Marino's founder fled from that coast to escape religious persecution.
 The public response to the important Conference on Population and Development, which brought representatives of many countries to Cairo in an effort to solve some of the problems hindering the fair and balanced development of all peoples, has now faded away.
 The decisions taken during that Conference, whose aims have been distorted and misinterpreted, are only a small step forward.
 However, it is encouraging to see how it has been generally recognized that our common concerns cannot and must not lie only in a necessary reduction of rapid population growth.
 All the problems related to this issue must be addressed, thus ensuring all people's rights to existence, to good health and free development, and the disposal of their resources as they see fit.
 The Republic of San Marino participated in the Conference, which was held in Egypt, prompted by the conviction that it was its duty to offer a contribution.
 Mr. Vilchez Asher (Nicaragua), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 In line with the policy adopted, we feel compelled to call for respect for human rights and dignity.
 The latter implies the right to make free choices, the right to development, to democratic progress, equality, equal opportunities, and the right to live in peace.
 It seems that the United Nations has given to the Cairo, Copenhagen and Beijing conferences the task of outlining a feasible solution to all the problems related to social development and the status of women.
 It is clear that in declaring 1994 the International Year of the Family the General Assembly made a precise and well-considered choice.
 By this decision the Assembly's aim was to celebrate an essential part of society, in the conviction that the family, the smallest democracy at the centre of society, is the first and most important element of any country's structure and deserves special attention by all States.
 In a national and international context characterized by a disquieting crisis of values, by increasing economic and social difficulties and by a growing lack of models for young people, the family, with its various historical, cultural and religious components, represents the last hope for mankind.
 Against this background, all Governments have the primary task of formulating policies capable of helping and supporting the family and its components while respecting its autonomy and specific features.
 The widespread development we all hope to achieve has its roots in the family, in respect for it and within it, and means in practice gender equality and equal dignity between men and women.
 On the other hand, development and its equitable distribution can be obtained only if our projects include the safeguarding of the environment.
 It is a notorious fact that too often protection of the natural environment is sacrificed for economic and national reasons that damage the interests of other people and the common well-being.
 The richest and most industrialized countries are regularly destroying the natural environment inside and outside their borders.
 Therefore, we deemed it necessary and fair to include the environment, along with peace, economic growth, social justice and democracy, as items on the Agenda for Development the project proposed by the Secretary-General for the solution of the problems that will face our planet within the next century.
 In San Marino we have created the Foundation for the Environment, with very ambitious programmes, and we hope in the future to have the cooperation and support of the United Nations.
 Therefore, it is high time for all States to adopt appropriate social policies and develop structures in support of the poorest and weakest groups of the population.
 Solidarity is not only spiritual sharing but also, and above all, the substantial support offered by the rich countries to the poor ones, the solidarity of the upper classes with the lower classes, and even distribution of welfare, equal rights and opportunities.
 We are still witnessing with amazement shameful anti-Semitic, xenophobic and racist attitudes, showing that a culture of tolerance, dialogue and respect has still to be developed at all levels.
 The concept seems to me to be very simple: all men are equal and no one can claim to be superior.
 However, respect for others seems to be difficult to achieve, since it cannot be imposed by law or by a Government decision.
 The role played by the United Nations as it approaches its fiftieth anniversary an event we are about to celebrate confirms all that.
 International peace and security, the solution of many domestic crises, the settlement of disputes, the beginning of social and economic development, respect for human rights, humanitarian help, decolonization and other legal rules in international relations are all fields in which the United Nations is working.
 The Organization, by adapting its structure to new circumstances and needs, will be able to offer a stronger commitment and to be the authoritative and dynamic guide the world needs for the future.
 More than 50 years ago, in June 1944, the world conflict brought death and ruin even to the neutral mountain of San Marino, which had no part in the conflict and where thousands of poor refugees, deprived of everything except their lives, had sought shelter.
 The appeal for peace launched almost 50 years ago by the signatories of the San Francisco Charter is still dramatically up to date.
 Some might think that a peaceful world is a mere Utopia, and they might be right.
 But I am firmly convinced that everyone must contribute to the achievement of this wonderful Utopia.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I now call on the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq, Mr. Tariq Aziz.
 I am certain that his experience will be a positive factor in ensuring the success of the session's deliberations.
 Over the past five decades it has taken an active part in all the Organization's activities, has cooperated effectively with its various organs and has contributed generously when it was able to do so.
 During the 1970s it provided assistance and soft loans amounting to about $10 billion to developing countries in Africa, Asia and Latin and Central America.
 Iraq has called for justice in political and economic relations and has affirmed the need to respect international law.
 These positions of Iraq are known to all.
 What now concerns my country is the nature of the current stage of the relationship between Iraq and the Security Council, which is based on the Council's resolution 687 (1991), adopted in April of that year.
 That resolution, which imposed a number of obligations on Iraq, has no precedent among United Nations resolutions throughout the history of the Organization.
 This is how it is seen today in international circles, both legal and political.
 However, despite its cruel and extraordinary nature, Iraq informed the Security Council that it was ready to comply with it within the requirements laid down by the Charter's provisions regarding resolutions adopted under Chapter VII.
 In March 1992 less than a year after the adoption of the resolution and in November of the same year we came to the Security Council to explain the substantial and serious steps that had been taken by Iraq in the process of implementing its provisions.
 The letter dealt with the monitoring of weapons.
 This was done after we had been assured that Iraq's official acknowledgment of compliance represented the most expeditious means of securing the application of paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991).
 This clear and categorical assurance is referred to in the report issued as document S/26571 on 12 October 1993.
 However, what we were told would be done has not been done.
 During the past 11 months we have witnessed transparent tactics to delay and obstruct.
 Their purpose is to delay indefinitely the lifting of the embargo.
 With the exception of food and medicine, it includes everything and affects all aspects of life.
 As a result of the freezing of Iraqi assets in foreign banks, Iraq is denied all the financial resources that would enable it to pay for the food and medicines its people need.
 This has rendered practically redundant the exceptions relating to food and medicines.
 However, the reality is exactly the opposite: decisions are required to be unanimous.
 It is sufficient for the objection of one member to frustrate any request for imports.
 What has made the situation in the Sanctions Committee even worse is that it proceeds on the basis of procedures which do not recognize precedents and deals with each case individually.
 Let me refer to some glaring examples.
 The Iraqi Government makes available to every citizen a limited rations of flour, rice, tea, cooking oil, soap, baby formula and whatever other items might be available.
 Despite the efforts of the Government to support and develop the agricultural sector, great difficulties continue to be faced due to the embargo.
 For example, the lack of pesticides, insecticides, agricultural machinery and equipment, water pumps and fertilizers.
 We do not have the financial means to offset these shortages; and when we do have some financial resources, the Sanctions Committee promptly obstructs their importation.
 The third FAO Special Report of May 1994 dealt with the grave problems of providing food and crops in Iraq due to the shortages of agricultural requirements.
 The same Report noted that these problems cannot be solved by the provision of food aid and that the permanent solution to the present food crisis lies in reviving the Iraqi economy which cannot be achieved without resuming the activity of international trade.
 In the public health sector, health services have deteriorated, after they had been amongst the relatively advanced in the world.
 Due to shortages of medicine and the deterioration of medical equipment, cases of death have reached 384,022 cases from August 1990 to March 1994.
 The cases of death among infants have also increased and now reach 126 cases per l00,000 live births whereas it had been only 32 per thousand in the period 1985 to 1990.
 There are those who claim that the Government of Iraq is the party responsible for not making available food, medicine and essential civilian needs to the people because it has refused to accept Security Council resolutions 706 (1991) and 712 (1991).
 Such allegations are mere falsifications.
 Through five rounds of talks with the Secretariat in Vienna and New York in 1992 and 1993 we have sought to reach acceptable modalities through sound arrangements in order to ensure the satisfaction of the humanitarian civilian needs of our people.
 However, despite the sustained efforts that have been made, such efforts have failed to reach an appropriate solution, a solution free of the objectives of the biased political programme through the pressures brought to bear by the United States.
 One of the major ironies during those talks was that the oil and banking experts who were part of the United Nations delegation did acknowledge that the arrangements adopted in the two said resolutions were not at all customary in the oil and banking fields.
 Those two resolutions were never intended to meet the humanitarian needs of the people of Iraq.
 In the course of the Security Council's periodic reviews, which take place every 60 days and the latest of which took place on 14 September last, the United States falsely accused Iraq on various counts in order to justify its position of delaying the lifting of sanctions indefinitely.
 We find it useful to refer to some examples of these accusations so that the General Assembly may see the picture clearly.
 The United States charges that Iraq's cooperation with the Security Council has been sporadic, selective and opportunistic.
 The facts, however, prove otherwise.
 This is made clear in the reports of the Special Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency, especially those issued since July 1993.
 Another accusation is that the Government of Iraq cut off electricity from certain areas in the northern Iraqi Governorates.
 Those who make this accusation ignore the fact that the comprehensive embargo imposed upon Iraq does not make sufficient financial resources available to the Government to import spare parts and equipment for ensuring the maintenance of electrical service in the country.
 Moreover, the accusers are the very ones who constantly object in the sanctions Committee to Iraqi requests for importing material with which to maintain the electricity grid, in the event we have some resources available to that end.
 According to the allegation, this action destroys their cultural heritage and causes harm to the environment.
 The planning for these projects goes back to the days of the Rehabilitation Board in the fifties.
 One of the ironies of the situation is that the principal proponent of draining the marshes of southern Iraq in the fifties was an American expert working for the Iraqi Board.
 It is also ironic that one of the rivers in the area is still called the Dutch River because a Dutch company carried out a project there.
 I have been prompted to mention some of the accusations levelled at Iraq in order to shed light on the real situation and the fabrications and falsifications used as pretexts to prolong the iniquitous blockade against us.
 But it is even more important to refer to some glaring examples of the conduct of those who accuse us, to wit, the United States of America.
 The United States, the State that is so concerned with respect for Security Council resolutions, imposes two no-fly zones in the north and the south of Iraq without any authorization from the Security Council or any legitimate justification under international law.
 The United States Administration stated openly that that agreement would have strengthened the authority of the present national Government in Iraq, which was contrary to the United States objective of changing that Government.
 Despite the harshness of the Security Council's resolutions concerning Iraq, we have implemented many of their provisions fully.
 We are legally and correctly continuing with the implementation of whatever provisions remain in the relevant resolutions.
 Within this process, we are also prepared to satisfy and allay the concerns of the members of the Security Council of which we have become aware in our contacts, although some of them have been introduced in legally irrelevant contexts.
 This, undoubtedly, is the rule of the Charter.
 Consequently, under the Charter, the members of the Security Council, both individually and collectively, bear the joint responsibility of the membership of the Organization.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I now call on His Excellency Mr. Petros Solomon, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Eritrea.
 Mr. Solomon (Eritrea): At the outset I wish to seize this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Amara Essy on his election as the President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 I am confident that he will guide our deliberations with wisdom and skill.
 Permit me also to rejoice with the people of South Africa, who have at long last eradicated apartheid and created a plural society in which all citizens of South Africa shall live in harmony, freedom and equality, irrespective of their ethnic, religious or class backgrounds.
 Their victory is a victory of good over evil and a tribute to the concept of unity in diversity, as well as a unique example of the concerted, unremitting and successful struggle of humanity against a pernicious assault on human dignity and nobility.
 We welcome the agreements reached between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), as well as subsequent agreements reached between Israel and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
 We hope that this initial move, whose momentum must be maintained, will augur well for a comprehensive, permanent and enduring peace in the region as a whole.
 We have now entered a new era of renewed hope.
 As the United Nations approaches its golden jubilee, it has become increasingly evident that the majority of the nations and peoples of the world believe that the world Organization is essential and are reposing renewed hope and confidence in it.
 In the aftermath of the cold war, we are witnessing a transition towards a new pattern of international relations.
 With the uncertainty of the historical process that is establishing a new world order, the United Nations has once again become the eminently relevant, perhaps even the indispensable, Organization that its founding fathers wished it to be.
 This is also a favourable time for the United Nations to raise global awareness, fashion a common world outlook, probe new frontiers and create new standards, particularly in the realms of sustainable and equitable global development; conflict prevention, management and resolution; human and democratic rights; and social justice.
 Those great tasks, my delegation is convinced, will inevitably require commensurate changes in the structure and functional modalities of the United Nations system itself, if it is to cope with the challenges of the new international order.
 The institutions and agencies that reflected the exigencies of the last half-century must be modified or yield to new ones that mirror not only the optimism and needs of the present but also the hopes and aspirations of the future.
 The international system must turn obviously, at a gradual and measured pace towards a fairer and more equitable representation of its constituencies in all the organs of the system, and especially in the Security Council.
 This may indeed be the most opportune time to review structural issues with new vision and boldness, the ultimate purpose being to instil and build into the system a dynamism that will enable it to respond and adjust promptly to changing global realities.
 Furthermore, we feel that the United Nations must place significant emphasis on the creation of a reliable early warning system that would enable it to avert disasters and conflicts.
 An active, rather than a reactive, role on the part of the United Nations can go a long way towards reducing, if not preventing, human suffering and towards mitigating disasters and conflicts at reduced cost to the international community.
 Secondly, all available evidence on the structure of the United Nations emphasizes the need to restructure it on the basis of equilibrium between the forces of centralization and decentralization.
 Others, including the breakdown of political systems and regional inter-State conflicts may be better and more correctly understood and solved by regional actors, institutions and approaches.
 There is thus an imperative to set in motion a dynamic arrangement balancing centralization and decentralization to create the desired juridical basis for a new world order underpinned by a political culture of peace, justice, economic well-being and a healthy environment.
 Only such an environment can make the Organization an effective actor that protects and promotes peace, development and human rights.
 I must perhaps emphasize here that the impoverishment that stalks the region as a whole is largely man-made and cannot be attributed to the vicissitudes of nature, as is often done.
 Decades of war and civil strife have sapped the energy, productive capacity and problem-solving mechanisms of the populations, leaving them easily susceptible to even minor imbalances in rainfall patterns and natural calamities.
 It is against this backdrop, and within the framework of a regional approach, that we have attempted to address the quest for collective security in our region.
 In Somalia the countries of the region, under the chairmanship of President Melles Zenawi of Ethiopia, have done much to restore normalcy to the country by bringing the warring factions to the negotiating table.
 In this connection, we believe that this is an auspicious moment for the United Nations to decide to focus in the period ahead only on the provision of assistance for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the devastated country of Somalia.
 The opinion advanced by some in the last few days that the extension of the mandate of the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM) is vital for and will enhance political reconciliation is, we are convinced, seriously flawed.
 Indeed, all evidence from the country indicates that such action is likely to complicate or delay the process.
 On the other hand, the Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development (IGADD) should take upon itself, and be encouraged to continue, the political reconciliation it has facilitated in the past.
 In the Sudan, the countries of the region have applied the same regional approach and have proposed different frameworks of conflict resolution to facilitate a comprehensive political settlement that takes into account the best interests and welfare of both sides.
 Thus, the crisis in the former Yugoslavia does not appear to be any nearer to solution.
 The events in Rwanda are a tragic reminder of human folly and have etched an indelible mark on the collective conscience of humanity.
 These events no doubt reinforce the necessity for preventive measures and perhaps the need to make a fresh assessment of the conventional limitations of the United Nations in peace-keeping.
 Prince Dlamini (Swaziland): I bring with me the greetings and good wishes of His Majesty King Mswati III, Her Majesty the Indlovukazi, the Government and people of the Kingdom of Swaziland to all our friends and fellow Members of the United Nations.
 Let me also offer Swaziland's gratitude and praise to your predecessor, whose wise direction ensured the success of the deliberations of the Assembly at its forty-eighth session.
 The past 12 months have presented many challenges to our Organization, in its pivotal role as an effective instrument for fostering global peace and security, and as a dynamic forum for promoting a spirit of understanding and cooperation among the nations of the world.
 Today, in a triumph for the spirit of reconciliation, peace and compromise among all South Africans, we welcome the new, non-racial and democratic South Africa back into the family of the United Nations.
 As a result the millions of South African people who had been denied a voice in this Hall will once more be heard.
 As neighbour, partner and ally, Swaziland, and the other countries in the subregion, have particular reason to rejoice at the successful process of transition in South Africa.
 Quite apart from the benefit of peace to the area brought about by a successful political transformation, we all look forward to enjoying the fruits of closer economic and trade cooperation with the region's most influential country.
 Swaziland has been most impressed with the very clear policy of His Excellency President Mandela, stated consistently since he took office in May, on the importance of close cooperation with others in the region.
 We have already welcomed South Africa into the Southern African Development Community, and other initiatives are under way to forge closer trade and economic links between our newly liberated neighbour and the rest of the subregion, for South Africa cannot expect to stand on its own in the future.
 Even as we celebrate the return of peace and stability in South Africa, our continent continues to provide some of the worst examples of people's inhumanity to one another.
 Swaziland watched with horror as the tragedy unfolded earlier this year in Rwanda.
 The situations in Burundi, Liberia, Sudan and Somalia also continue to give us cause for grave concern.
 Swaziland supports all peaceful efforts aimed at bringing about negotiated settlements to the problems in these countries.
 Despite the many set-backs to peace on our continent, the past twelve months have also seen substantial progress among a number of countries - progress which owes much to the efforts of our Organization.
 I have spoken already of our admiration for the developments in one of our neighbouring countries, South Africa, which took the path of reconciliation and peace towards the much-needed process of reconstruction and development.
 The same degree of respect applies to our other neighbour, Mozambique, which, after so long a period of bitter hatred amongst its people, has at last chosen to lay down weapons in favour of the ballot box.
 Swaziland joins the world in praying for a peaceful election process later this month, and calls on the leaders to allow the same spirit of reconciliation and unity that brought an end to the war after so many years to continue after a new government has been chosen.
 We appeal to the international community to continue to provide the financial, technical, moral and material support that will be necessary for Mozambique to rebuild itself, and to give its people a chance to fulfil their high potential.
 We welcome the opportunity presented now for the Basotho people themselves to address their concerns.
 It is our fervent hope that the agreement will be implemented successfully, without undue delay, so that lasting peace and stability may come to the kingdom.
 The direct effects of developments on our continent are of obvious concern to the Kingdom of Swaziland.
 But in this day and age of global interdependence, the potential effects on us of situations outside Africa are of equal importance.
 In the Middle East, the seeds of peace and reconciliation, sown last year by Prime Minister Rabin and Chairman Arafat, and encouraged by the United States, Norway, the United Nations and others, are at last bearing fruit.
 Talk of trade and cooperation is replacing the noise of gunfire, as the bitter rivalries of generations give way to a new order of peace in the region.
 Swaziland salutes all those who contributed to the process of peace in the Middle East; we appeal to the leaders of the region to join in the process and to allow it to continue without disruption, so that precious resources may be directed towards worthwhile development goals.
 We also support all efforts on the Korean peninsula, where disaster has been pending, to bring about real progress on the nuclear issue.
 We look forward to the peaceful reunification of the two Koreas, and encourage all moves to bring this to fruition.
 Wars and conflict situations in Africa and around the world continue to stretch our belief that people can ever live peacefully with one another.
 This issue has been central during discussions at subregional and regional conferences.
 Most recently, important resolutions were adopted at the Organization of African Unity (OAU) summit in Tunis, and at the Southern Africa Development Community summit in Gaborone, which went some way towards deciding on the regional response to one of Africa's most pressing problems.
 But despite almost unanimous willingness for our countries to become involved more directly in the continent's conflicts, it was clearly recognized that the majority of us lacked the resources to lend an effective hand.
 The Kingdom of Swaziland therefore supports the growing call for an integrated approach to conflict resolution on our continent, which would bring close cooperation between Africa and the rest of the world by establishing mechanisms to coordinate the resources of both in the most effective way.
 Many of Africa's present conflicts could well have been prevented or contained if properly coordinated mechanisms had already been in place.
 The Kingdom of Swaziland welcomes discussion here so that a plan of action can be agreed upon quickly on this vitally important issue.
 His Majesty has begun the process of investigating under what conditions the nation's soldiers can be offered, bearing in mind the small size of the defence force and our relative lack of appropriate weapons and equipment.
 These are some of the issues to be looked at before we can fully commit ourselves to taking this more active role in global peace-keeping, and we will be approaching the Secretary-General for consultations on this important initiative.
 The focus of the world is on the requirement now to channel our resources towards achieving lasting global stability through the sustainable development of our countries, providing us with improved standards for all our peoples.
 The welcome end to the period of confrontation between the world's super-Powers should mean that increased global resources can now be redirected to achieving a new and more balanced world economic order.
 Closer attention can now be given to the plight of all developing countries, which continue to suffer the effects of serious development neglect.
 This crucial point was discussed at length at last weekend's meeting of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in Madrid, where the view of the developing world was made very clear.
 We in the region know ourselves, all too well, what factors continue to obstruct our progress.
 It is a familiar catalogue, including resource constraints; inappropriate development policies; the slow pace of industrialization and transformation into producers of processed goods; inadequate infrastructure; natural disasters; and a continuing round of armed conflicts.
 We understand our responsibility to our people to mobilize our resources in the most effective way to overcome the obstacles to national development.
 We also recognize that we cannot hope to achieve long-term sustainable development without, at least, the short-term assistance of the rest of the global community.
 Much of what we need is contained in the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s, and our continent's collective appeal is for the swift and full implementation of its many programmes.
 Swaziland welcomes recent initiatives towards strengthening South-South cooperation, and we believe they will result in real progress towards overcoming the economic challenges facing us all in that grouping.
 Recent United Nations initiatives also guide us in our Government policies.
 As a follow-up to the Earth Summit, for example, we have established a national environmental authority to ensure that environmental concerns are properly integrated into all stages of public policy and national development strategy formulation.
 Swaziland welcomed the opportunity to address the recent United Nations Conference on Population and Development in Cairo, and the adoption of the Programme of Action constitutes a significant step in our collective aim.
 The Kingdom had already embraced the option of acceptable child spacing as the cornerstone of our population growth policy, and we have begun a comprehensive programme of education for our people in the realities of and efforts to deal with overpopulation.
 These and all aspects of the economic development of the Kingdom will be debated by the whole nation during the process of national economic consultation, which was recently initiated by His Majesty the King.
 The process is designed to allow all Swazis the opportunity to be involved in deciding the future direction of the Kingdom's economy, and will embody the nation's wishes for future priorities and strategies.
 These in turn will form the basis of our request for future support from our friends in the international community, and we will be keeping the United Nations fully informed of developments.
 The democratic elections were declared free and fair by the international community and, more importantly, were what the Swazi people themselves had chosen.
 We believe this principle is at the heart of the peace and stability we have enjoyed for many generations, and it has spared us the horrors of internal conflict suffered by so many on our continent.
 His Majesty King Mswati III joined a number of other Heads of State in raising this issue at the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
 Quite apart from the principle of universality, there are other important factors for us to consider when reviewing the case.
 The Republic of China in Taiwan has much to offer to the world community.
 As more and more worthy targets appear for the United Nations resources, we can surely ill afford to reject the call to investigate further whether that country's assistance can be put to wider use through the agencies of our Organization.
 These people believe that they are excluded from our founding principle of universality.
 In consideration of this right, which they believe has been denied them, the time has surely come for us to listen to their voices.
 We have the opportunity now, in this forum, to lay the foundations for an agenda for development that will bring about the stability and peace we all desire.
 The Kingdom of Swaziland is proud of its membership of the United Nations and commends the work of all who have contributed to the many successes over the years.
 The nation is deeply indebted to the United Nations agencies, whose efforts are contributing so much to the attainment of our development goals.
 May Almighty God bless these deliberations with the success they deserve.
 The President (interpretation from French): The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam, Mr. Nguyen Manh Cam, on whom I now call.
 I am confident that, under your guidance and with the active contributions of member countries, this session of the General Assembly will have a successful outcome.
 I also wish to take this opportunity to express our admiration for the efficient performance of your predecessor, Mr. Samuel R. Insanally.
 We greatly appreciate the great efforts made by Mr. Boutros-Ghali in his high post as Secretary-General of the United Nations in the cause of peace, national independence and development.
 The most appropriate way for us to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the Organization is to help it act in a manner commensurate with its global role and with the important, difficult and complex tasks set out by the new world situation.
 The world panorama is full of contradictions.
 While the threat of a destructive world war has been further checked, ethnic, religious and territorial conflicts continue to persist or even multiply in a number of regions.
 Against this disturbing backdrop, there have been some rays of hope that certain conflicts in the world will be settled.
 The success of the struggle waged by the South African people to abolish apartheid and establish a new united, democratic and non-racist State in South Africa constitutes a historic achievement for the South African people, the United Nations and the world community.
 In the Middle East, encouraging progress has been made, particularly between Palestine and Israel and between Jordan and Israel, in the negotiating process and the search for peace.
 These developments foster hopes of reaching a just and lasting peace in the region and of restoring the Palestinian people's rights to self-determination and an independent State in their own land.
 They cannot, however, help being worried about attempts to use social and environmental issues as fuel for protectionism.
 We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's initiative in producing his "Agenda for Development".
 There is an increasingly irresistible trend towards dialogue and international and regional cooperation.
 Blockades, embargoes, sanctions and the imposition of conditions in international relations are relics of the past.
 In this connection, we wish to express our deep sympathy with the Cuban people in respect of their current difficulties.
 We demand an end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed on Cuba.
 We hope that the two countries will continue their dialogue with a view to settling other outstanding differences between them.
 At a time of opportunities and challenges, of hope and fear, the United Nations bears, more than ever, a heavy responsibility in regard to the maintenance of international peace and security.
 Despite the Organization's efforts, satisfactory solutions to the conflicts in Bosnia, Somalia and Rwanda have yet to be found.
 The tendency to resort more and more to measures of enforcement and intervention to try to resolve intra-State conflicts has prompted legitimate concern among many countries.
 In view of the growing democratization of international relations, we join those delegations that are demanding reform to democratize the United Nations system.
 I should like to mention in this important forum a particularly significant coincidence of history.
 As the United Nations prepares to celebrate its fiftieth anniversary, the Vietnamese people are looking forward enthusiastically to commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of President Ho Chi Minh's solemn declaration to the entire world of the birth of an independent, free and democratic Viet Nam.
 Only now, half a century after its birth, is Viet Nam able to really concentrate its efforts on socio-economic development.
 Located in the most dynamic development zone in the world, Viet Nam is fully aware of the danger constituted by the widening gap between its level of development and that of other countries of the region.
 Viet Nam has embarked upon the path of reform and renewal in every sphere of its society's life.
 The reform and renewal process has achieved important initial results.
 The average annual growth rate of our gross national product for the three years from 1991 to 1993 was 7.3 per cent; for the first six months of this year, the rate rose to 8 per cent.
 Our international economic cooperation and trade relations and foreign investment in our country have grown rapidly.
 Our people's living conditions have been improved.
 Further progress has been made in the cultural, social, educational and health-care areas, especially regarding the care of children.
 Along with economic reforms, Viet Nam has gradually carried out the reform and renewal of its political system in order to build a society in which the rights of each and every one will be increasingly ensured.
 We continue to move forward in our efforts to establish a state of law, perfect the legal system and undertake national administrative reform.
 After the promulgation of the new Constitution in 1992, our National Assembly adopted a number of important laws, including the civil law, the labour law, the land law, and the law on the promotion of domestic investment.
 With these achievements, Viet Nam is now shifting towards a new stage in its development - that of the industrialization and modernization of the country.
 To create a favourable international environment for national construction and development, Viet Nam has been pursuing a foreign policy of openness, diversification, and multilateralization of its relations, while carrying out our desire to become the friend of all countries in the interest of peace, independence and development.
 We are pleased to note that our policy is developing in complete harmony with the general trend throughout the world, and especially in South-East Asia - that is, the trend towards pursuing peace and cooperation in the interest of development, after decades of war and confrontation.
 In its implementation of this foreign policy, Viet Nam gives first priority to enhancing the relations of friendship and cooperation with neighbouring countries in the region, and to creating peace, stability, cooperation and development in South-East Asia.
 Our bilateral relations with each of the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and with the Association itself, are experiencing rapid and satisfactory growth, primarily in the economic and commercial areas, particularly since Viet Nam became an ASEAN observer in 1992.
 At the ministerial Conference of ASEAN held in Bangkok last July, the ASEAN Foreign Ministers unanimously supported Viet Nam's full membership in this Association.
 With the increased support of the ASEAN countries, Viet Nam is actively preparing to take all the necessary steps to join this Association as a full member.
 All this demonstrates the growing cooperation in South-East Asia, as well as the robust movement towards the attainment of the common goals of the region: peace, stability and security.
 With regard to the Kingdom of Cambodia, Viet Nam ardently wishes to see its neighbour become an independent, peaceful, neutral, non-aligned country, maintaining friendly relations with all countries.
 We consider that all signatories to the Paris Agreement on Cambodia are bound to scrupulously observe that Agreement, to refrain from interfering in that country's internal affairs and to actively contribute to the process of national reconciliation and the restoration of peace and stability in Cambodia.
 Certain articles of that Law have given rise to some concern.
 His Royal Highness King Norodom Sihanouk and the Royal Government of Cambodia share the legitimate concern of the Government of Viet Nam and have undertaken to avoid any regrettable consequences and agreed to begin negotiations with Vietnam soon to settle this problem.
 We firmly believe that multilateral relations, especially within the framework of the United Nations, are playing an increasingly important role in international life.
 For its modest part, Viet Nam will unceasingly strive to make positive contributions to the common cause of the United Nations for peace, development and social progress throughout the world.
 Mr. Muntasser (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of my country and in my own behalf, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to the Presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 My delegation is confident that, familiar as you are with the work of the United Nations, and with your extensive experience in the field of international relations, you will be able to steer this session to a successful conclusion.
 I should also like to seize this opportunity to express my delegation's appreciation of your predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Insanally, for the wisdom he displayed, the efforts he made and the initiatives he took to reform the United Nations and enhance its role.
 Further, I wish to express our gratitude to Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the Secretary-General, for his tireless efforts to strengthen our Organization so as to enable it to face the numerous crises that beset the international community.
 The international situation witnessed many developments during the forty-eighth session.
 The will of the people of South Africa has triumphed after a long struggle and great sacrifices.
 Along with these developments, tangible progress has been recorded in the implementation of the Peace Accord in Mozambique.
 Moreover, the artificial tension in the Korean peninsula is now subsiding.
 However, they do not mask the gloomy points of the wider picture of the international situation.
 Many disputes still await a solution.
 The outbursts of nationalist passions, ethnic chauvinism and power struggles in the absence of any power among the people, have led to the outbreak of new regional conflicts.
 It must also make more efforts to solve the problem of Kashmir on the basis of bilateral agreements and the relevant United Nations resolutions in particular.
 We also consider that the sanctions imposed on Iraq, which cause suffering to the Iraqi people, should be lifted, since the reasons for these sanctions are no longer valid.
 Their continuation can only mean a grave injustice aimed at the destruction of the Iraqi people and the extermination of large groups of its population.
 Although the United Nations has repeatedly reaffirmed these resolutions for more than 40 years, the Palestinian question still awaits a solution, the Palestinian people remain displaced and their rights are systematically and continuously violated.
 This proves that the so-called ongoing peace process lacks the elements necessary for any comprehensive settlement.
 The solution that made it possible to build a united, democratic and non-racial state in South Africa offers a model for resolving the question of Palestine through the establishment in Palestine of a democratic non-racial State with Al Quds as its capital, where Arabs and Jews can live together.
 This is the proper solution, without which it would be impossible to reach a just and lasting peace that serves the interests of both Jews and the Palestinian Arabs.
 Mr. Sinunguruza (Burundi), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 The numerous changes witnessed by the world after the cold war have created opportunities to build a more stable and secure world.
 The experience of the past few years has caused deep concern regarding some developments.
 This problem was raised, pushed arbitrarily through the Security Council, and dealt with under Chapter VII of the Charter, which is not applicable in this case since Libya has not threatened anybody and has never acted in a manner that jeopardized international peace and security.
 The whole issue is merely the suspicion that two Libyans may be connected to the Pan Am flight 103 incident.
 We have taken the necessary judicial measures consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and international law, with only one proviso, that they do not involve any violation of Libya's sovereign rights.
 Although the Security Council was pushed into the adoption of resolution 731 (1992), Libya did declare its readiness effectively to cooperate in the implementation of that resolution.
 It was our hope that the three States concerned would take that into consideration and respond positively to the requests of Libyan authorities for cooperation in completing the investigation.
 However, the three States concerned responded in an entirely different way.
 And when these States are confronted with the fact that the Jamahiriya has really complied with these requirements, their officials, and particularly British and American officials, answer with the words "Libya knows what is required of her".
 Indeed, if the aim had really been to bring Libya to comply with the requirements of resolution 731 (1992), that aim has been fully realized.
 Libya has taken the legal measures necessary to pinpoint responsibility for the terrorist acts perpetrated against both American and French planes.
 Libya has requested the three States concerned to cooperate in completing the investigation in this respect.
 Libya has even invited neutral bodies to follow it up and international and humanitarian organizations to monitor its fairness.
 My country has cooperated with the French judge in charge of the investigation aimed at determining responsibility for the explosion aboard French UTA flight 772.
 Contacts in this respect still continue.
 To this end, several meetings were held between the Libyan and British sides.
 Libya has also severed all its relations with all groups and organizations suspected of being involved in terrorist acts.
 Libya has emphasized that it will not allow its territory, citizens or institutions to be used for such acts whether directly or indirectly.
 We have declared our readiness to punish severely whoever is proved to be involved in any terrorist acts.
 Later it was revealed that the acts used by that State as a pretext for its aggression were unfounded.
 The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has spared no effort in trying to resolve the dispute, including trying the two suspects in the Pan Am flight 103 incident, although the matter has been predetermined by the 1971 Montreal Convention which gives Libya the right to try the two suspects itself.
 Recently, new information on the American aircraft incident has been uncovered, including a book entitled Tracking the Octopus by Coleman and Donald and the statements by the manager of a Swiss electronics company.
 These new revelations obliterate the central element on which the accusations against the two Libyan citizens was based.
 Despite all this, Libya maintained its cooperation in trying to identify all the circumstances surrounding the incident.
 Even after new information was revealed by the Palestinian citizen, Yousef Shaaban, before a Lebanese Court, Libya did not hesitate to go ahead with the trial and did not waver in its declared readiness to accept any verdict emanating from such a trial.
 This, once again, underlines the fact that the Libyan Jamahiriya has no objection to the trial of the two suspects.
 All that Libya wants is for the trial to be fair and just, free from any emotional or media influences, and with the availability of all guarantees consistent with the norms of legality and international law, which Libya has observed and applied.
 The International Court of Justice (ICJ) can testify to this, since that Court has considered, over the past 10 years, three cases to which Libya was a party.
 The ICJ decided the case relating to the continental shelf between Libya and Tunisia, and both parties fully implemented the ruling of the Court.
 This year, the Court decided the territorial dispute between the Jamahiriya and Chad.
 Though the ruling rejected Libya's demands, the Jamahiriya did implement it in a constructive spirit that was welcomed and appreciated by both the Security Council and the Secretary-General.
 This shows the extent of my country's commitment to and respect of international legality, something that great powers pay lip service to but never apply.
 These States refuse even to appear before the ICJ, since they believe in the legality of force and not the force of legality.
 This august Assembly, which includes all States represented in those organizations, is now called upon to show its appreciation of Libya's position, Libya's steps and initiatives and the proposals that we have accepted.
 This Assembly is also called upon to express its support of these demands, so that the Security Council will reconsider its resolutions on the crisis and lift the unjust sanctions.
 The power is in the hands of the people, who now suffer the consequences of these sanctions - for example, the crash of a Libyan civilian aircraft in 1992, leading to the death of all 157 civilians aboard, as a result of the ban on spare parts.
 Furthermore, 1,622 people have been killed in car accidents, and 350 people, most of whom were children, old men and women died as a result of delays in moving them abroad for medical treatment.
 These sanctions have also caused economic damage estimated at $4.5 billion.
 Before the Second World War, and following the end of that war, the Libyan people suffered and continue to suffer all sorts of pressure, troubles and pains.
 Against our will, we had to be a theatre of war between the colonial powers, a war that was fought on our soil and for which we were the fuel.
 From time to time, these mines explode and kill innocent people.
 In previous sessions of this Assembly, my country has repeatedly called on the States concerned to cooperate with us in removing these mines.
 Today, 7 October, coincides with the commemoration of the Libyan people of the 25th anniversary of the evacuation of the last Fascists who had settled in Libya and oppressed its people.
 Once again I repeat my call and urge the States concerned to respond positively to the resolutions of the General Assembly, instructing them to provide the necessary information on mines, give technical assistance in removing them, and pay compensation for the losses they have caused.
 This may also be a good opportunity to remind the imperialist states that occupied our lands for over 40 years that we have not forgotten the ruin and destruction they left behind.
 The peoples of the world are called upon to adopt a historic resolution, through this Organization, condemning colonialism and forcing former colonial powers to compensate their former colonies, in order to prevent the re-emergence of colonialism and prevent the powerful from once more blackmailing and oppressing the weak.
 The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya welcomes efforts aimed at enhancing security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region.
 We voice our satisfaction with the initiatives whose objective is to enhance economic, social, cultural and environmental cooperation in the region.
 Libya calls for taking all measures necessary to remove all causes of tension in the area, especially through the withdrawal of foreign military fleets whose continued presence jeopardizes peace and security in the Mediterranean, which in turn are closely linked to international peace and security.
 It has also opened new channels of cooperation with organizations in the areas to which we belong both geographically and culturally.
 Libya looks forward to more international cooperation with a view to destroying nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as well as other weapons of mass destruction.
 My country also hopes that more efforts will be made to conclude a treaty on making Africa a nuclear-weapon-free zone and the activation of the initiative aimed at making the Middle East region free from weapons of mass destruction.
 The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is a party to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
 We hope that the preparatory committee for the 1995 review conference will, in its next session, reach an understanding that takes into consideration the concerns of all parties to the Treaty, especially as regards its extension.
 My country still has some difficulty in accepting an indefinite extension of the Treaty, because such an extension does not take into account several of our concerns, including the unavailability of credible security guarantees for non-nuclear-weapon states.
 It has not acceded to the Treaty, nor has it signed a safeguard agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
 Libya is determined to support and contribute to all international efforts aimed at guaranteeing the effective enjoyment of human rights.
 We thus welcome the conclusions of the Vienna Conference, which constitute a step on the road to the support and enhancement of human rights.
 That human rights Conference rejected the manipulation of human rights and their use as a tool of political pressure.
 It must also oppose any attempt by any State or group of States to distort the principles and values of other peoples or to promote the principles and values of such States or groups of States as the only proper values that should be embraced by all peoples.
 We believe it is impossible to solve these problems effectively unless the international community deals seriously with and puts an end to the erroneous practices that continue to characterize international economic relations.
 In the course of the last session, we followed with keen interest everything that was achieved in this regard.
 We hope future efforts will result in an increase in the membership of the Security Council based on equitable geographical distribution.
 It also establishes the dangerous precedent of giving permission to a State, unhappy about waves of immigrants reaching its shores, to occupy the land where the immigration originates.
 Libya cannot afford to overlook this invasion or keep silent about it, first, as a matter of principle and, secondly, because Haiti has a special place in our history.
 Forty-five years ago Haiti played a decisive role in a matter of interest to us.
 Its deciding vote won the adoption of the General Assembly resolution on Libya's independence.
 This question should be the focus of attention in the next session because it will mark the demise of the old order and the building of the new order that will replace it.
 The new order we need is one that enhances and protects human rights and eradicates poverty, suffering, division, conflicts, disputes and wars.
 It must be an order in which no State seeks to impose its hegemony and abuse its influence, an order that supports the settlement of disputes among States by peaceful means, not by arbitrary and coercive means.
 We need a new order under whose umbrella all peoples can look optimistically to a future where security, peace and stability prevail.
 It is appropriate that on the eve of the fiftieth anniversary of this Organization we enter a new era in international relations, an era untainted by the cold-war politics that held peace and positive change hostage for too long.
 This new era demands that all Member States take a global view of how the Organization can best meet the objectives set out in the Charter.
 President Bill Clinton and President Boris Yeltsin demonstrated this new hope for peace at the opening of the general debate, when both addressed the General Assembly on the same day instead of on consecutive days, as was the old practice.
 In a spirit of cooperation, these two world leaders described their intent to reduce their nation's stockpiles of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction.
 But disarmament must start from the heart.
 And I hope that this is the case with the step these two Presidents have taken towards the betterment of all humankind.
 Today, we would recall that peace and hatred come from within people - the mirror of a nation, the image of a region and the living treasure of the global community.
 In order to build a peaceful and safe world for future generations, our resolve to reduce nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction must lie within the hearts of our leaders and policy makers throughout the world.
 We must therefore seize this opportunity and work together to build a better world.
 The noble efforts of President Mandela to chart a new direction for South Africa must be commended.
 In his first address as the first President of the new democratic South Africa, President Mandela acknowledged the efforts of the international community in this way:
 "The universal struggle against apartheid and its final dismantlement was not an act of charity arising out of pity for the majority of South African people but an affirmation of our common humanity."
 Progress towards a lasting peace in the Middle East has renewed the hope of the international community for stability in that region.
 The parties involved in these negotiations deserve our sincere acclaim and praise and our continuing support.
 These are telling achievements for our times, and their roots are embedded in the human spirit of love and kindness.
 Despite United Nations interventions to restore intra-State and international peace and security, the world is still riddled with trouble spots and endangered by human-induced threats such as the potential impact of climate change and sea-level rise.
 True and real peace has to spring from within the warring parties, replacing animosity.
 It spilled over into Solomon Islands and caused a rift between the two countries.
 Nevertheless, through a process of mutual dialogue between the National Government of Papua New Guinea and the Bougainville Revolutionary Army, several important agreements have been signed.
 These include the Honiara commitments to peace, the cease-fire agreement and the historic peace-keeping agreement on Bougainville.
 The role of the Solomon lslands Government in this conflict has been conciliatory, facilitating peace negotiations amongst the parties concerned.
 Solomon Islands supports the Bougainville Peace Conference, expected to be convened on 10 October.
 We believe it to be the only world body capable of maintaining world peace and security.
 Solomon Islands shares the views of New Zealand's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Right Honourable Don McKinnon, whose statement at the general debate provided six important management issues that should be addressed while conducting United Nations peace-keeping operations.
 There is no doubt in my mind that all of us want an effective United Nations - an Organization that meets the objectives it sets out to achieve, an Organization whose Charter is valid because its actions are reliable.
 Solomon Islands welcomes the current initiatives undertaken by the Secretary-General in reforming the Organization and supports proposals made by other Member States for further reforms.
 These reforms, in our view, must also reflect the needs of small island developing States such as my own, particularly the need to remove "the floor" to enable Member States to meet their financial obligations.
 Some want to pay their assessed annual contributions but do not have the capacity to do so; hence a relative and fair formula should be worked out.
 These are efforts of Member States committed to the noble cause of securing a peaceful, safe and sustainable world to live in.
 Technology has made the world's smaller economies become more interdependent.
 Agenda 21, the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, made a special case for small island developing States because of their peculiar vulnerabilities.
 Solomon Islands fully supports the Barbados Programme of Action and calls on the members of the international community to honour their commitments as spelled out in Agenda 21.
 The successful implementation of the Programme of Action will depend on these commitments.
 Some of those bodies have already gained observer status at the United Nations.
 This shows the useful role these arrangements and organizations can play in international affairs.
 Therefore, the strengthening of regional arrangements and organizations that are working closely with the United Nations is a critical issue.
 We acknowledge with gratitude the role of Australia, the current Chairman of the South Pacific Forum, in guiding this initiative through the United Nations system on the Forum's behalf.
 We thank Member States that have expressed support for this call and invite others to do likewise.
 As a member of the South Pacific Forum and the Melanesian Spearhead Group, Solomon Islands endorses the Forum Communiqu issued following the meeting of the twenty-fifth South Pacific Forum held in Brisbane, Australia, this year.
 Solomon Islands calls upon the international community to support our regional arrangements and organizations from which our strength for collective action is derived and which are responsible for our flow of communication.
 Forestry and fisheries resources remain my country's main income earners.
 The Solomon Islands Government is gravely concerned about the unsustainable utilization and management of these resources and has taken steps to ensure sustainable harvesting and conservation measures and to form a national policy.
 Because of the fragility of our ecological system, our biodiversity resources, including forestry and fisheries and other marine living resources, are threatened.
 However, we strongly feel that further cooperation is still needed from the distant water fishing nations regarding sustainable harvesting of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, including non-targeted species.
 We therefore urge distant-water fishing nations to come to grips with the need to complete, as soon as practicable, negotiations on a legally binding agreement on proper conservation and management and sustainable utilization of high seas fisheries resources.
 Education is a priority sector in my country.
 It is a key to the effective management of my country's natural resources as well as a means of achieving the advancement of women to take their rightful place in society.
 We welcome the outcome of the Cairo International Conference on Population and Development and look forward to the World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in 1995.
 The World Summit for Social Development also has profound implications for capacity-building, institutional strengthening and the transfer of technologies and their appropriate use.
 Human-centred activities, including tourism development and skills training, are important for the development of human resources.
 We endorse the 1994 Human Development Report of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for its emphasis on human-centred development, an approach that has positive ripple effects in solving other social problems.
 We need international cooperation to stop the movement of illegal drugs from one region to another.
 Solomon Islands supports the South Pacific Forum position that the non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) should be extended indefinitely.
 We also wish to see a rigid review mechanism set up to be a safeguard instrument as an integral part of the indefinite extension agreement.
 It is encouraging to hear the United States, the Russian Federation and China speak in support of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the comprehensive test-ban treaty.
 It is hoped that a level of harmony between the NPT, the comprehensive test-ban treaty and the cut-off convention may be maintained to enhance the elimination of weapons of mass destruction in an integrated manner.
 Solomon Islands urges the post-Forum dialogue partners that have not yet done so to ratify the South Pacific nuclear-free zone Treaty.
 We strongly oppose those who may violate this natural rule.
 We need to see some further movement towards a speedy implementation of the Matignon Accords.
 In this regard, we request the Government of France and the territorial authorities to increase their efforts to achieve real economic and social rebalancing.
 Solomon Islands welcomes the move to formulate an agenda and proposals to promote trade and investment between the United States and the Pacific Islands, which will be the subject of a meeting at the East-West Centre in Hawaii later this year.
 Apart from the other vulnerabilities that plague small island developing States, the potential impact of climate change and rising sea levels poses a great threat to Pacific islands.
 There is overwhelming scientific evidence pointing to the danger we now face.
 We in Solomon Islands firmly believe that the Republic of China on Taiwan has much to contribute to the work of the United Nations and its specialized agencies in terms of international cooperation and development.
 This Republic, with a population more than 58 times that of my own country and highly technologically advanced, deserves to be admitted as a Member of the United Nations.
 We in Solomon Islands, too, love life very much, and our search is for a better quality of life, which should flow from the wise and sustainable development of our resources.
 I believe that the answer to the problem of bringing about world peace lies in our own hearts, not in the barrels of guns or military might.
 Here, in this great world Assembly, let our hearts enkindle a new torch to shine on the new path to world peace, from the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations and beyond.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand, His Excellency Squadron Leader Prasong Soonsiri.
 My delegation very much appreciates his untiring and effective leadership and his dedication to the work of this body.
 Under his presidency, the General Assembly had an eventful year, and its role was enhanced in ways which were beneficial to the Organization.
 Thailand joins the rest of the international community in congratulating the Government and people of South Africa on having established a united, democratic and non-racial country.
 They have shown us that compromise is possible and that even the most long-standing and bitter of conflicts can be resolved peacefully.
 This achievement is due entirely to the exceptional vision, courage and pragmatism of the country's leaders - in particular, President Nelson Mandela and Executive Deputy President F.W. de Klerk.
 There is another bright spot giving all of us hope for a more peaceful world.
 Since the Thai Government has long supported the Middle East peace process, the termination of the state of war between Jordan and Israel, announced in Washington in July this year, following last year's historic agreement between Israel and the PLO, gives all of us reason to rejoice.
 We hope that it will lead to further agreements on "other tracks" acceptable to all parties concerned, so that a durable peace in the Middle East may finally be achieved.
 We also welcome the positive developments concerning the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula and hope that dialogue and negotiation between the parties concerned will eventually result in that part of the world enjoying lasting peace and stability.
 However, in spite of the promising outlook for international peace and security, there remain political and military conflicts of both global and regional magnitude.
 It is therefore imperative that countries continue unfailing efforts to secure a stable and peaceful international environment.
 As a first step in this direction, the international community could support and cooperate in efforts towards comprehensive reform and total revitalization of the United Nations to enable the Organization to meet the new challenges of today's world and to assist Members efficiently in their peaceful endeavours.
 Thailand pledges its continued support for the Secretary-General's proposals in "An Agenda for Peace".
 These constitute an innovative and practical framework for the maintenance of international peace and security and deserve serious consideration by all Member States.
 Designed to be a high-level consultative forum on political and security matters, the ARF held its first meeting in Bangkok on 25 July 1994, after the twenty-seventh ASEAN ministerial meeting.
 Nineteen ministers from countries in the Asia-Pacific region and from the European Union attended this historic meeting to discuss political and security cooperation issues, such as the latest developments on regional situations, and decided to carry out some practical confidence-building measures applicable to the Asia-Pacific region.
 As Chairman of the first ARF meeting, Thailand is pleased with the results of the meeting and its achievements.
 The ARF has also demonstrated its potential to make substantive contributions towards the United Nations efforts at preventive diplomacy and at maintaining international peace and security.
 In other words, the ARF got off to a good start.
 Thailand is fully aware that the first meeting of the ARF in Bangkok was only the beginning.
 These activities could help the ARF find its future direction and enable it to become more efficient and productive.
 Political and military security are but one aspect of the bigger picture facing us.
 As we search for a new international order based on a common set of principles and values, we need to change our way of thinking.
 We also need a new culture of development cooperation and new definitions of the notions of security and development.
 We are now witnessing the creation of major landmarks of international consensus-building.
 In 1992, the Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit set a new stage for global partnership on the environment and sustainable development.
 Last year (in Vienna), the World Conference on Human Rights was held, producing a world programme of action.
 Last month in Cairo we witnessed the International Conference on Population and Development.
 Next year in Copenhagen, the World Summit for Social Development will be held.
 This Summit will serve as a bridge between this year's Conference on Population and Development in Cairo and next year's Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing.
 It also presents a unique opportunity for the international community to respond, on a global level, to urgent human and social concerns that place people at the centre of the development process.
 In light of this, we have established a social cabinet dedicated to formulating policies and finding solutions to a number of pressing social problems.
 We have also organized a joint committee comprising members of the private sector and of Government and chaired by the Prime Minister.
 Its mandate is to oversee efforts to alleviate the social problems that beset a growing economy, such as those being experienced by my country and others in the region.
 Thailand has participated and will continue to participate actively in all global deliberations.
 These conferences create new paradigms of international conduct which give rise to the various comprehensive global plans of action.
 They have also started the new process of redefining the notions of security and development.
 Security in this final decade of the twentieth century goes well beyond the familiar concepts of old.
 It must involve people - how they live and how they exercise their choices.
 Development, as pointed out by the Secretary-General, must be seen in its five interlinked dimensions: with peace as the foundation; the economy as the engine of progress; the environment as a basis for sustainability; justice as a pillar of society; and democracy as good governance.
 My country shares these perceptions and supports their premises as envisioned by the Secretary-General.
 Such an agenda should reflect and indeed promote self-reliance as well as interdependence among Member States.
 There is no doubt that development is primarily a national responsibility.
 Yet, it is also a shared responsibility of the international community.
 It is our firm belief that the development effort of any State in today's world must be supported by a conducive international environment, based on free and fair trading practices.
 These two intertwined issues must be the core of any effort to strengthen the role and activities of the United Nations as we approach the next century.
 Together with the "An Agenda for Peace", "An agenda for development" should serve as an instrument for the coordination of activities within the United Nations, as well as between the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions, and other non-governmental organizations.
 It should be an instrument to create unity of purpose, at both the policy and operational levels, within the Organization.
 The United Nations cannot be a strong force for peace unless it is also a strong force for development.
 The United Nations remains humanity's best hope for creating a more desirable world - a world with a conscience, a world which recognizes that humans everywhere, young or old, strong or weak, are at the centre of our communal and individual efforts.
 To this end, I should like to reaffirm Thailand's commitment to this vision, which cannot be fulfilled without the active participation of Member States.
 Thailand will do its part in contributing to this end.
 A world united by this vision and this unity of purpose will surely be a better place for us all and, more important, for our children and grandchildren.
 I remind members that, pursuant to decision 34/401, statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to 5 minutes for the second, and should be made by delegations from their seats.
 Mrs. Albright (United States of America): I am obliged to reply to the speech by the representative of Iraq, which attacked the United States, misrepresented the facts about Iraq's lack of compliance with Security Council resolutions and insulted the United Nations.
 The issue here is not the United States record, but Iraq's record.
 It has sought to evade, ignore and negotiate away its obligations.
 The only approach it has not tried is compliance.
 For more than three years, Iraq has failed to account for Kuwaiti and other prisoners and missing persons.
 It has yet to return all of the Kuwaiti property it stole.
 It continues to destroy systematically one of the world's richest ecological regions and to suppress brutally the human rights of its citizens, all in contravention of Security Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 688 (1991).
 This is the same Government which, years before "ethnic cleansing" was employed in Bosnia, erased hundreds of Kurdish villages from the map of Iraq and used chemical weapons against its own civilians.
 Iraq continues to request sanctions Committee approval for import of luxury goods.
 None of Saddam's family is hungry, and his dwindling number of supporters still enjoy imported liquor and cigarettes.
 The Government of Iraq refuses to do more to help its people precisely because it knows that their suffering is the only Iraqi argument the world community views with sympathy.
 Iraqi cooperation on weapons of mass destruction is grudging and incomplete.
 It has never revealed details about its past biological-weapons programme, and it is seeking to reactivate its network of equipment supply for these programmes.
 A change in Iraqi behaviour in all of these areas is the programme of the Security Council, ratified in its resolutions.
 This morning's speech was a classic attempt to define white as black.
 Iraq is the aggressor, the initiator of the conflict.
 It has never accepted the simple fact, agreed upon by virtually every nation represented here, that its invasion of Kuwait was illegal from the beginning.
 We had hoped that the Iraqi representative today would have addressed this core issue.
 Instead, he found himself still incapable of mentioning the word "Kuwait" in public, still unable to address the core issue of the conflict: Kuwait's sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and borders.
 Yesterday's statement by the Revolutionary Command Council threatening action against the United Nations if the Security Council does not meet Iraq's demands was a giant step backwards in meeting the fundamental criterion of Security Council resolution 687 (1991): that the Council be assured of Iraq's peaceful intentions.
 This morning in New York we heard promises of compliance; from Baghdad we hear threats and defiance.
 The two statements may be dressed differently - one as a lamb, one as a wolf - but they convey the same fact: that the Government of Iraq continues to believe that the use of force and threats against its neighbours is legitimate.
 Even as we listened to placating words from the Iraqi representative, the facts on the ground were quite different.
 They are deploying with ammunition and other logistical supplies.
 I do not believe any member of this Assembly could characterize these facts as evidence of peaceful intentions.
 On the contrary, these military facts belie everything we have just heard from the representative of Iraq.
 Let it be absolutely clear to the Iraqi Government that a repetition of its past mistakes will be met by my Government with the same resolve as before.
 Moreover, seeking to precipitate a crisis will not encourage the Security Council to speed the lifting of sanctions; it will have exactly the opposite effect.
 Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I feel obliged to respond, in exercise of the right of reply, to the statement made here on 5 October by the representative of Greece, who alleged that the Greek minority in Albania is denied human rights as it was during the previous, Communist regime.
 I would respond by citing the following facts.
 "Individuals belonging to minorities shall enjoy, without discrimination and with equality before the law, fundamental human rights and freedoms.
 That provision has been fully implemented in practice.
 With regard to the Greek minority, I would mention some important aspects of its implementation, such as the educational system in the Greek language.
 It comprises 85 schools at all levels including university, 46 classes of which have fewer than 10 pupils, whereas the basic rule that applies in the country requires that classes should have not less than 20 students.
 The Government's decision on education dated 22 August 1994 increases the opportunity for, and offers the possibility of, education in the mother tongue for minority people living in areas of mixed population.
 It took the Greek Government only one day to describe that decision as a restriction of the right to education of the Greek minority in Albania.
 In the local government, the Greek minority is represented by 13 chairmen of communes, 159 councillors of district councils and 32 councillors of civic councils and so on.
 There are Greek newspapers, several hours of radio broadcasts in Greek and its own cultural and political organizations.
 Since the establishment of the democratic regime, the Greek minority enjoys the right to travel freely to Greece and elsewhere.
 During the Hoxha communist regime, many people who attempted to cross the barbed-wired border were killed.
 As regards the trial of five Albanian citizens of Greek origin, constantly referred to by the Greek Government, and again by its representative at this session, I should like to make clear that the defendants were charged with collusion with the secret services of Greece.
 The court sentenced them for smuggling several hundred firearms in an organized manner, for recruiting and sending Albanian citizens of Greek nationality to Greek military schools without the knowledge of the Albanian Government, of gathering secret military information and of illegal possession of weapons.
 The Albanian delegation is ready to provide any interested country with the dossier containing pertinent materials confirming such activities.
 It is appropriate here to emphasize that the guilt of the defendants has never been questioned, whether in the resolutions or in the recourse mentioned by the Greek delegation or in any other reports.
 Greece, whose State or quasi-State organs appear to be involved in the findings of this trial, has reacted strongly in all international institutions.
 Prejudging the trial, the Greek Government began its campaign long before the opening of the trial, trying to influence the verdict of the district court of Tirane.
 This is a hostile act, unacceptable to any country.
 The only existing document entitled "Report of the trial monitoring in Tirane" - distributed at the meeting of the permanent committee of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) in Vienna on 19 September 1994, reads as follows:
 Even in this document, there is no evidence of any reservation concerning the charges or the innocence of the five defendants.
 In his briefing to the permanent committee in Vienna, Mr. Van De Stoel said that none of the defendants had complained about their treatment in prison.
 The above-mentioned document of the CSCE also states that "the Albanian judicial system has made considerable progress since independence".
 I must stress that the Greek Government has failed to offer a solution to the legalization of the status of the Albanian immigrants despite Albania's insistence that it wishes to help solve this problem.
 With regard to economic assistance, I have not much to add since the Greek representative left no room for doubt about the position of Greece, which is already well known, namely that Greece persists in blocking the assistance of the European Union to Albania.
 It is regrettable that the Greek Government continues to distort the truth about the large Albanian minority living in Greece from time immemorial and in its own lands.
 The reference to the Chams as collaborators with the Nazis is but an attempt to justify the massacre against the Cham people in 1944 and 1945 when many of them were forcibly expelled and sought refuge in Albania.
 Neither the former Greek authorities nor the present Government have allowed them to reclaim their property.
 Despite the current difficulties, my country continues to hope that Greece will respond positively to Albania's open invitation to an unconditional dialogue for we are convinced that the crisis in the relations between the two countries can and ought to be resolved through dialogue.
 No nationalism whatsoever will succeed in bringing about a shift in its orientation towards full integration into Europe.
 My delegation has the honour of informing the Assembly that this law was adopted by a very large majority in the National Assembly of Cambodia, a sovereign State that emerged from the elections in our country, which were supervised by the United Nations.
 The law reflects the concerns of the Cambodian people, responds to the current situation and is applied uniformly to all foreigners without discrimination.
 Any measure to implement the law and the regulations relevant thereto will be subject to joint consideration by the countries concerned, among others the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
 Mr. Al-Qaysi (Iraq): The representative of the United States exercised her right of reply in respect of the statement made this morning by my Deputy Prime Minister.
 She alleged that our statement attacked the United States, misrepresented the facts about Iraq's lack of compliance with Security Council resolutions and insulted the United Nations.
 Evidently, the representative of the United States was repeating the same accusations that she levelled against my country in the periodic reviews of the Security Council, the last of which was held on 14 September 1994.
 It is quite obvious to me that the statement of the representative of the United States is an open attempt to draw my delegation into a rhetorical exchange, an attempt which I shall resist.
 Facts are facts.
 I would refer those who wish to verify that fact to this morning's issue of the Washington Post.
 I wonder, therefore, whether calling in the General Assembly for the correct implementation of its commitment to the Charter by a Member State can be characterized as an insult to the General Assembly.
 The record that is at issue in our statement is the record of the members of the Security Council, notably that of one or two permanent members when they block the correct process of the implementation of commitments under the Charter.
 Although these very resolutions were drafted by the United States itself, they are not being implemented - not because the Council does not want to implement them, but because the United States does not want them to be implemented.
 An allegation is an allegation.
 Before it is proven, it remains only an allegation.
 If we are to base conclusions on allegations, then it would mean, as seems quite clear from the statement of the representative of the United States, that even the movement of troops within State boundaries is not an act of peaceful intention.
 Are we not even allowed to express our frustration and anger, according to the representative of the United States?
 To conclude, let me repeat that facts are facts.
 The rights and obligations of Member States under the Charter are clear.
 We are not here to play worn-out records simply for the sake of not allowing the correct process of implementation to continue.
 Mr. Simmonds (Saint Kitts and Nevis): Once again I am proud and honoured to have the opportunity to address this assembly of nations and to convey to representatives fraternal and cordial greetings from the Government and people of Saint Kitts and Nevis.
 The convening of the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations provides the Governments of all Member States with an important opportunity to reaffirm their commitment to the cause of peace, democracy and the pursuit of a higher quality of life for our peoples.
 Allow me, Sir, to thank the outgoing President, His Excellency Mr. Samuel Insanally, for the astute and most able manner in which he conducted and guided the affairs of this body during its forty-eighth session despite unprecedented trials and numerous challenges.
 His resolve and his successes give credence to his commitment to the planting of seeds of cooperation and goodwill in every corner of the globe to ensure that our children and grandchildren may feast on harvests of peace, equality, freedom and democracy.
 The Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has faced many problems of great complexity during the past year.
 Our people enjoy the effective workings of the democratic process and the safeguards provided by its institutions.
 In our hemisphere, military regimes have been giving way to democratically elected Governments.
 While there have been some untoward incidents, we must not be deterred.
 We must be prepared to stay the course for the benefit of the people of Haiti and for the growth of stable democracy in this hemisphere.
 The process of establishing democracy will not end with the return of President Aristide; it will have just begun.
 In order to support the process, it is absolutely essential that the international community be ready to mobilize significant financial and technical resources to ensure the rebuilding of Haiti's economy and institutions - institutions destroyed by decades of neglect and mismanagement.
 Saint Kitts and Nevis stands ready to assist in the long and arduous task of helping the Haitian people rebuild their economy.
 Last year my delegation welcomed the announcement of the holding of non-racial and multi-party elections - something for which my Government had been calling since joining this Organization 11 years ago.
 However, despite the successes, the new South Africa is still on the threshold of unprecedented challenges.
 The contrasting realities of our world are quite real and apparent.
 Not long ago the prospect of peace in any form seemed practically impossible.
 The international community must be ready to give unreserved support to that process and afford it more durable mechanisms for success.
 No one could have predicted that so much would have been possible, and in so short a time.
 The rapidly changing face of Middle East politics augurs well for the overall peace process, quality of life and stability of the entire region.
 As prospects for peace continue to flourish in the Middle East, the tranquillity of the Gulf region is once again being threatened by an Iraqi troop build-up near the Kuwait border.
 It is time for the people of Kuwait to feel secure within their own borders.
 It is time for full compliance by Iraq with Security Council resolutions pertaining to the aggression against Kuwait.
 It is time for Kuwait nationals detained in Iraq to be returned to their homeland.
 It is time for Iraq to pursue peaceful policies with its neighbours.
 The constantly changing realities of the present world situation call for Member Governments to harden traditional attitudes while making genuine attempts to search for pragmatic solutions requiring different and unprecedented approaches and compromises.
 We note with great satisfaction that the leaders of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzergovina have managed to arrive at a peaceful settlement of disputes.
 These atrocities and the flagrant and consistent violation of human rights are an affront to everything we as human beings hold sacred.
 The international community must continue to express its just indignation at the atrocities in this arena of conflict.
 At the same time, we must pursue all initiatives to find a just and lasting solution, preferably at the negotiating table.
 We repeat this plea today.
 I must reiterate, however, that we should not stop there, but should aim also for the non-proliferation of all weapons, including chemical, biological and conventional.
 In most cases the victims of these land-mines are poor farmers and innocent children.
 It is our sacred and solemn responsibility as world leaders to ensure a safe world for our nation's children.
 My delegation therefore congratulates the United Nations on its consistent efforts to fulfil its humanitarian missions in the many different theatres of tragic suffering world-wide.
 The scope and scale of this human disaster, unprecedented in the history of modern-day Africa, should catapult us to seek a peaceful end to the crisis.
 We must act decisively to mobilize more resources from every possible source to intensify the relief effort in that tragic country.
 The United Nations is being called upon with greater frequency to respond to a greater variety of conflicts, suffering and development needs.
 If the Organization is to be able to respond effectively, we must evaluate from time to time not only our resources, but the way in which we manage those resources, and ensure that there is greater accountability in such management.
 In short, the United Nations, recognizing the responsibilities entrusted to it by the international community, must be more accountable to its Members.
 We must remain cognizant of the fact that the fundamental sovereignty of all States, large or small, is respected equally by the United Nations.
 It has institutionalized the rights of small and micro States to exist and to coexist with the big and powerful nations.
 All independent States, therefore, irrespective of their size and population, are equal under international law.
 One way to achieve this is through more equitable geographical representation within the Secretariat, and I appeal for this to be implemented.
 My Government stands firmly behind that appeal and we repeat this appeal here today.
 It has proven repeatedly that it is a country committed to peace, democracy and development, not only for its 21 million people, who are entitled to proper representation internationally, but for all peoples, that their quality of life may be improved.
 The Republic of China in Taiwan is a major international player in commerce, trade and development assistance, and would make a significant contribution to the work of the United Nations.
 I would now like to turn our attention to the question of sustainable development and small States, and to commend quite highly the efforts of the United Nations in bringing the reality and concerns of small island developing States to the forefront of international focus.
 The Declaration of Barbados is a step in the right direction. It recognizes that small island developing States have special and peculiar needs.
 Although we recognize the Conference in Barbados as a giant step for small island developing States, the discussion must be taken much further, beyond conference halls and into communities, and translated into practical tangible benefits.
 However, existing problems and innovative attempts by small island developing States to improve their standard of living very rarely receive consistent support from the developed world.
 Micro States like Saint Kitts and Nevis are being called upon to prove their viability within the international community.
 The irony lies in the fact that when we manage to raise our standard of living to a decent level, the international community withdraws or reduces its support under the pretext that our GNP per capita is too high.
 Small island States like mine suffer greatly from environmental and natural disasters, yet we lack the capacity to respond to and recover from them.
 The objective reality of our individual and collective experience speaks volumes.
 We need special attention. We need special regimes.
 As I have done in the past, I appeal for greater equity within the international economic system.
 The time has come for the developed world to rethink the outdated policy of trying to make a single prescription fit all countries.
 We need to develop a more durable, and country-specific approach, based on fairness, economic circumstance and need.
 Above all, the concept of the vulnerability index must become part of the economic language and armamentarium of all multilateral and national development institutions.
 Indeed, the developing world should not view our small island Caribbean States as dumping grounds for over-produced consumer items, but see us as developing economies whose fragile banana and sugar exports need to be protected.
 The developed world, therefore, cannot claim paternity over our biodiversity under the pretext that their technology was used.
 Further, on the issue of the environment, I would like to call upon the developed countries to de-link economic assistance, trade and investment from environmental protection.
 In most cases, small island developing States are penalized for allegedly exploiting limited resources and for so-called environmental degradation.
 I urge the international community to assist developing countries to obtain the wherewithal to gauge the exploitation of resources and to do environmental impact assessments so as to ensure that the precarious balance is maintained.
 Social, economic and political advancement in small developing countries should not be held to ransom by the industrialized world as a way of punishing them for environmental degradation.
 The protection and preservation of the environment is a global responsibility and must engender a collective approach.
 The industrialized world must take responsibility for much of the damage to the environment and work towards a framework for international cooperation and partnership in preserving it.
 Developing countries ought to be given assistance and be presented with alternatives to destroying the forest or depleting the limited resources at their disposal.
 This will ensure success in achieving our goal of sustainable development.
 At the important and historic World Summit for Children of 1990, participating Governments agreed to make the world a much safer place for future generations of children.
 At the United Nations Conference on small States, we decided to commit our efforts to the efficient use of land resources, to work towards creating better education and improved health care, and to exploit natural resources on a sustainable basis.
 If we achieve this, we shall indeed be bequeathing to our children and their children a much safer world.
 My Government is of the view that a concerted attempt to redeploy much of the world's resources, to discover new resources and to use them more equitably would better serve the interest of development for all peoples.
 I cannot but remind us all that the international menace of drugs and drug trafficking still looms large.
 The danger and the trade are ever-increasing.
 We should continue to wage a determined and aggressive war on drug trafficking and narco-terrorism, which seek to undermine and unravel the social and political fabric of our societies.
 Therefore, we must together find practical solutions to the problems of hunger, poverty, war, crime, development and freedom in every corner of our world.
 The President (interpretation from French): The next speaker is the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and International Business of Barbados, Her Excellency the Honourable Billie Miller, on whom I now call.
 Ms. Miller (Barbados): Mr President, it is a pleasure for me to congratulate you, Foreign Minister Essy, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 It is with a deep sense of pride and satisfaction that I also offer my Government's congratulations to our outgoing President, Ambassador Rudy Insanally of Guyana.
 I also extend the good wishes of the Barbados Government to our distinguished Secretary-General, Dr Boutros Boutros-Ghali, whom the Barbadian people had the honour of receiving in Bridgetown earlier this year.
 We offer him our continued support in his difficult task at the helm of the Organization at so crucial an epoch in world affairs.
 We also acknowledge the sterling contribution of the Special Committee against Apartheid, which for 32 years worked unremittingly to achieve this remarkable outcome.
 South Africa is well poised to play a significant role in this Organization, and the international community has much to learn from the South African experience.
 It is, however, imperative that we recognize that South Africa still very much needs our assistance with the great challenges that lie ahead.
 The Cairo Accord, which paved the way for the commencement of Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and in Jericho, and the Israeli-Jordanian Declaration, signed in Washington in July this year, are welcome steps on the difficult path towards the attainment of peace in that region.
 The people of Barbados went to the polls on 6 September and, in an incident-free election, voted a new Government into office.
 I am honoured to be a part of that new order.
 The democracy that Barbados practices is ingrained in the culture and habits of its people.
 For them, freedom of speech and association and freedom to vote at regular intervals for a Government of their choice and to have the Government installed in an immediate and orderly transfer of power are the simple and natural norms of life.
 My country, Barbados, has gained international recognition for its comprehensive network of social services, its people-oriented development policies and its high quality of life, which have earned it first place in the developing world in the United Nations Development Programme's Human Development Index.
 The present Government of the Barbados Labour Party fully recognizes the challenges that lie ahead for a small, middle-income country like Barbados to sustain that achievement in an international economic environment that continues to marginalize the small and fragile in the developing world.
 With few resource endowments, our survival must depend exclusively on the skills of our industrial and committed people and on the God-given beauty of our natural environment.
 We are determined to use the opportunities created by the technological and communications revolution to overcome the obstacle of size and to harness our natural and strategic assets to convert Barbados into a full-service economy.
 We will encourage the development of tourism and the international financial services and informatics sectors to their fullest potential.
 We will create a business-friendly environment that will be conducive to new investment, both local and foreign.
 We will facilitate the growth and development of the small-business sector and encourage entrepreneurship.
 A radically restructured Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and International Business, under my direction, has been put in place to spearhead this endeavour.
 Against this background, the people of Barbados view with concern the tragic situation of Haiti.
 For far too long Haiti has been a burden on the collective conscience of the region.
 We are greatly encouraged that the deployment into Haiti of the multinational force took place under peaceful circumstances and that the spectre of a bloody confrontation was averted.
 The clear terms of resolution 940 (1994) must be honoured in full, and the power of a brutal and lawless military and its callous leadership effectively and permanently neutralized.
 Where democracy has taken root, it should be encouraged to grow and to flourish.
 Like the Soviet Union and South Africa, Haiti too deserves its rendezvous with democracy.
 They voted for it. And now they are dying for it.
 Haiti's rendezvous with democracy has now begun in earnest.
 Hope is finally returning to a people that for a very long time had felt that all was lost.
 But as we in CARICOM have warned on numerous previous occasions, the ballot box is merely the beginning of the democratic process.
 The international community must now orchestrate a massive effort to put in place the institutional infrastructure necessary to maintain and strengthen the fledgling Haitian democracy and to bury forever the ghosts of the past.
 It must also respond effectively to the critical development needs of the Haitian population and to their just aspirations to share equitably in the resources of their country.
 The private and public sectors of our subregion are collaborating more and more, while, at the same time, intergovernmental cooperation has increased.
 The political dialogue between Heads of Government is flourishing, and economic cooperation is expanding.
 Concerted efforts are also being made to boost intraregional trade and to improve the economic, social and cultural well-being of our peoples.
 This year the Caribbean Community celebrated its twenty-first anniversary.
 The Association will bring together in their common pursuit of development 40 Caribbean-basin States, countries and territories with a total population of 200 million.
 Barbados fully supports the aims of the Association and welcomes its establishment as an important step in the consolidation of the regional integration effort.
 But our aims to foster development across the Caribbean will not be complete until all of the partners are free to participate on an equal footing.
 In this regard we believe the time has come to remove the last vestige of cold-war rivalry from our hemisphere.
 Earlier this year, 116 countries and 150 non-governmental organizations were represented at the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, held in Barbados.
 The first follow-up activity to be held in fulfillment of a mandate from the International Conference on Environment and Development, the "Earth summit", the Conference aimed to develop a blueprint of priority actions for the implementation of Agenda 21 in the specific context of small island developing States.
 We urge the international community to lend its full support to the measures proposed to ensure sustained follow-up and implementation of the proposals contained in the Barbados Programme of Action.
 We welcome the recent developments which have enhanced the prospects of universal participation in the Convention and look forward to the inauguration of the work of its relevant organs.
 We look forward too to the successful conclusion next year of the Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and to the adoption of a legally binding regime to regulate the conservation and management of these threatened stocks.
 The recent International Conference on Population and Development spoke volumes about the changing nature of international dialogue and the changing role of women.
 In greater numbers and with greater strength, civil society in the form of non-governmental organizations worked alongside Governments to craft a plan of action which might realistically address the reproductive health of women and the broader needs of women in the development process.
 For my country, the outcome of the International Conference on Population and Development and the Plan of Action confirm much of the effort which has been spent on improving women's access to family planning and health services.
 I stand before the Assembly as an example of the progressive attitude which Barbadians hold regarding women's status and leadership potential.
 I am also reminded that we too need to work on areas highlighted by the population Conference proceedings: difficult issues such as reducing maternal mortality, addressing the needs of special groups such as youth, and looking at how our policies and programmes further women's empowerment.
 Still, I am heartened by the openness of the United Nations processes to the contributions of citizens' groups alongside Governments, and will watch with great interest the progress at the social summit and women's conference.
 These conferences, together with the 1990 World Summit for Children and the 1992 Rio de Janiero Conference, extend along a continuum which urges action to look into the difficulties faced by our citizens and at how Government policies can relieve the uneven pressures which are put upon women.
 Barbados considers that these meetings are of vital importance and that their core themes demand the adoption of a meaningful programme of action that would demonstrate a firm commitment to the oft-repeated concept that the human being should indeed be placed at the centre of development.
 The legal framework and the established human rights machinery have been greatly strengthened by the Vienna Declaration and Plan of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights held at Vienna in June 1993.
 The Conference affirmed that democracy, development and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and especially emphasized that the right to development is a basic human right.
 At its forty-eighth session, the General Assembly honoured the Latin American and Caribbean region by appointing His Excellency Mr. Jos Ayala Lasso of Ecuador as the first United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights as a first step in implementing the Vienna Declaration.
 At its forty-ninth session, the General Assembly must now seek with equal vigour to implement the other important measures of the Vienna Declaration.
 In this context, we urge that the Assembly give serious consideration at this session to the harmful impact that illicit drug trafficking, organized transnational crime and terrorism have on the effective enjoyment of human rights.
 It is also important for the small, but morally authoritative, voices of this world body to continue to stress the absolute necessity for the international community to use equitably and responsibly the powers conferred upon it in the Charter.
 Over the past year, priority attention has been given in the work of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council to the task of elaborating an Agenda for Development as a necessary corollary to, and indeed a prerequisite for, the "Agenda for Peace".
 We have taken careful note of the Secretary-General's report to the forty-eighth session in this regard and look forward to giving detailed consideration to the recommendations which he will present in his report to this session.
 While we recognize that the United Nations has an inescapable responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, we must acknowledge also that peace and development are indivisible.
 The root causes of most conflicts are to be found in the legacy of poverty and dispossession that underdevelopment engenders.
 The betterment of the economic and social conditions of that majority deserves a central place in the deliberative and decision-making bodies of the United Nations and must be the principal objective of an Agenda for Development.
 The policies pursued by these institutions over the past decade, particularly within the framework of structural-adjustment programmes, have left a legacy which convinces us of the need for radical reform.
 There is little value in short-term economic growth if the measures used to attain it result inevitably in social disintegration.
 The Barbados delegation therefore strongly supports the view of the South Centre that fresh approaches must be sought and a new social contract established if social, political and economic objectives are to be reconciled.
 Decisions arrived at hastily to deal with only one aspect of the issue, or merely to respond to an arbitrary deadline of next year's celebrations, will not provide a lasting solution to this critical issue.
 The United Nations will have reached a remarkable milestone in 1995 as it celebrates 50 years of tireless service to the goal of enabling all mankind to live in dignity and enjoy better standards of life in larger freedom.
 While it is fitting that we acknowledge this milestone with appropriate ceremony, we must recognize that the United Nations will be called upon to face challenges in the twenty-first century that could be immeasurably more difficult than those of the previous era.
 Global stability will depend more and more on the ability of the United Nations to promote economic and social justice than on its ability to silence guns.
 This Organization is the only universal body with the legitimacy to take up this challenge.
 As we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the Organization next year, "We the peoples" must renew our commitment to this unique body and strive to ensure its relevance to the twenty-first century.
 I am very happy that we are here with you today, Sir.
 As regional conflicts erupt, the consequential increase in the number of displaced persons and refugees exerts greater pressure on the United Nations peace-keeping apparatus at a time when its available resources are already severely taxed.
 However, cost-effectiveness, commendable as that may be, should not be at the expense of those worthwhile programmes designed to benefit small developing nations.
 The ethnic and tribal conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda and the reported acts of genocide and other atrocities are troubling and must exercise the minds and hearts of human beings everywhere.
 The international community cannot appear to condone such reprehensible acts, and appropriate measures must be taken to punish those responsible.
 Accordingly, Dominica unhesitatingly supports the establishment of international tribunals for the trial and punishment of those persons found guilty of crimes against humanity.
 Acquired in many instances by third world nations, ostensibly to maintain secure borders and deter aggression, these weapons very often become effective instruments of internal repression and the cause of national and regional instability.
 Time after time the United Nations is called upon to expend its limited resources in repairing the damage and in alleviating the consequential suffering and misery.
 In many countries human rights abuses occur on a daily basis.
 Dominica's respect for human rights and its commitment to ensure that the rights of every citizen are protected cannot be questioned.
 We believe, however, that in the discharge of his responsibilities the task of the High Commissioner would be significantly strengthened if the United Nations General Assembly were to abandon its present selective condemnation of human rights abuses.
 Human rights abuses should be condemned wherever and whenever they occur and no nation should be permitted to take comfort from the fact that its violation of human rights covenants will escape the glare of publicity and the strictures of the international community.
 Above all we must congratulate and applaud the President, Mr. Nelson Mandela, and his Second Deputy President, Mr. de Klerk, on the courage, considerable skill and political enlightenment which they jointly and effectively harnessed in reaching an accomplishment that may eventually be regarded as a model for the world.
 Many difficulties lie ahead but there are reasons to be optimistic.
 With the assistance and support of the international community South Africa will succeed.
 The progress that has been made in the bilateral negotiations between Israel and its Arab neighbours in the Middle East is heart-warming indeed.
 Optimism must be tempered with caution, however.
 The implementation of the accords and full realization of Palestinian autonomy will depend for their success on generous financial support, both private and public.
 They temporized by entering into the Governors Island Agreement, which they later failed to honour.
 When the Haitian people were the victims of officially sanctioned brutality and violence, we felt their pain.
 When President Aristide returns, we will rejoice with them.
 We wish the Haitian people well, and we will do whatever we can to assist in their efforts to attain that measure of freedom that can come only from a government established on democratic principles.
 President Aristide is devoted to Haiti and the well-being of Haitians.
 We must support him and encourage him in this daunting and lonely task that he has undertaken for his people.
 However, as friends of the Haitian people, we plead with them to understand that democracy cannot be imposed from outside; it can only develop from a genuine desire of the people of Haiti of all persuasions.
 A political environment of intense hatred and passionate desire for revenge is not fertile ground for a young and fragile democracy.
 Success in their new endeavour will require that nobility of spirit that seeks the path of reconciliation and trust and eschews vengeance and recriminations.
 No one can pretend that the task will be easy, but the following excerpt from a speech delivered by Archbishop Desmond Tutu at the commemoration of the Day of the African Child on 16 June 1994 might be instructive to the Haitian people.
 Speaking of his beloved South Africa, the venerable archbishop said: The Minister of Justice of South Africa was detained several times.
 The security forces tried to kill him by swapping his tablets.
 Today he is writing, drafting the legislation for an amnesty to forgive the security forces that wanted to kill him.
 If it can happen in a South Africa where it is said the problem is so intractable, no country in the world can ever again have an excuse for not being able to resolve its problem.
 God is saying, I set before you South Africa as a paradigm.
 There is hope for the world when South Africa can become as it has become.
 The exclusion of the Republic of China on Taiwan from membership in this body and from participation in the activities of its various agencies continues to be of concern to us.
 On the contrary, in our view it is likely to help the process along, and no one can pretend that parallel representation stands in the way.
 Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 That proposition has long been acknowledged and incorporated into our decision-making processes, to the extent that today women have equal access to education at all levels and gender equality manifests itself in all facets of life in Dominica.
 We realize that the plan of action requires increased spending on social programmes for its viability, and it is hoped that at the Conference in Copenhagen in 1995, participants from donor and recipient countries will arrive at a reasonable formula in that regard.
 We support the establishment of the World Trade Organization and the liberalization of trade practices, but we need to remind the international community that fragile economies of small island states can be easily destroyed if free trade does not embody that measure of fairness necessary for their survival.
 The recent formation of the Association of Caribbean States will, we hope, provide a framework for increased trade among the States in the area and enhance the capability of the region in its search for ways to reach beneficial accommodation with more powerful trading groups in the hemisphere.
 We look forward to the forthcoming Summit of the Americas and the proposed frank and detailed examination of such issues as the hemispheric integration process - including a hemispheric free trade zone - the role of multilateral financial institutions, sustainable development, and resource flows and debt in hemispheric development.
 We hope that out of that gathering will come not only a keener appreciation of the vulnerabilities of the smaller States in the region but also a greater impetus for collaboration on matters of regional trade and development.
 As the United Nations prepares to celebrate its fiftieth anniversary, we need to place on record our recognition of its many worthwhile accomplishments, and we hope that it will continue in its search for new and innovative ways to meet the challenges of the future.
 The President (interpretation from French): The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Maldives, His Excellency, Mr. Fathula Jameel, on whom I now call.
 Mr. Jameel (Maldives): It gives me great pleasure to congratulate Mr. Amara Essy on his election to guide the work of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 His election to that important post is testimony to his personal credentials and to the important role played by Ce d'Ivoire in international affairs.
 I should also like to commend the work of his predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Samuel Insanally of Guyana, who demonstrated outstanding diplomatic skills and dedication in so ably steering the work of the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly to a successful conclusion.
 Allow me also to pay a well-deserved tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Ghali, for his untiring efforts in promoting international peace and security and justice.
 The recently held World Conference on Human Rights, the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, the International Conference on Population and Development and the forthcoming World Conference on Women and World Summit for Social Development are clear testimony to that hope.
 This was the dream of our founding fathers, and it is also ours.
 The United Nations must be able to evolve and promote a stronger and more comprehensive system for preventive diplomacy and peacemaking.
 Let us not allow potentially dangerous situations to escalate into situations that leave the international community with no alternative but to take painful and expensive measures to enforce peace.
 Most important, the Organization must play a revitalized role as the principal broker and promoter of peace and justice in the world.
 Special attention must be given to all the issues involved in the choice and recruitment of personnel if we truly intend to improve the efficiency of the Organization, and we must emphasize quality rather than quantity so that the United Nations system may remain non-biased, less-politicized and vibrant.
 It therefore falls to the world Organization to be the unequivocal guarantor of security and protection for those countries that lack the physical means to provide their own or that might simply be overrun by more powerful States.
 My delegation hopes that important item will once again receive the same attention and support it was given at the forty-fourth and forty-sixth sessions.
 My delegation draws inspiration from the unwavering and renewed resolve of the international community with regard to important security and political issues, which was significantly demonstrated in the Gulf crisis, among others.
 The recent instances in which the United Nations took firm and decisive action certainly highlight the importance and effectiveness of the collective-security system envisaged in the Charter.
 My delegation believes that this is the time to give urgent and deeper consideration to the overall question of collective security.
 This is easily said, but the subject includes the question of improving the skill and ability to exercise foresight and act with dispatch, as well as of building up the capacity and capability to move with greater coordination.
 True success in accomplishing this challenging task facing the international community will require sincere commitment and dedication.
 This can be achieved only if every Member of the Organization exercises the political will to settle all disputes peacefully, without discrimination, and to assist the United Nations to move forward in that direction.
 Time and again Maldives has stressed the importance of continuing accelerated efforts to attain the United Nations goal of completing the disarmament process.
 My delegation firmly believes that success in preserving and maintaining international peace, security and stability will depend on progress in the field of disarmament.
 However, the production, stockpiling and sale of weapons of war continue on an alarming scale throughout the world.
 Although there is a convergence of views regarding the dangers of nuclear arms, some countries seem to desire to acquire or retain nuclear-weapons technology.
 We remain convinced that its unconditional and indefinite extension should be one of the cornerstones for building a world free of all nuclear weapons.
 But this requires that all the countries possessing nuclear weapons and nuclear-weapons technology take a responsible stand, something that can come about only through a sincere desire to establish a genuine international non-nuclear regime.
 We therefore urge all those countries to join the international community in the persistent effort to establish a safer world.
 Unless we can overcome these uncertainties the chances of achieving global disarmament will indeed be bleak.
 The question of Bosnia and Herzegovina has yet to be resolved.
 We condemn the continuing violence and genocide there, and call upon the international community to take more decisive steps to implement the Security Council's resolutions in order to discharge fully the responsibilities entrusted to us by the Charter and restore the sovereignty and independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 Let us not tolerate in our time any act of genocide based on ethnic hatred or prejudice.
 Similarly, my delegation is deeply concerned about the tragic situations continuing in Angola, Somalia and Rwanda despite the fact that the United Nations is still providing humanitarian assistance to alleviate the suffering of their peoples.
 I feel that further intensification of South-South cooperation has become more necessary, in order to harness their resources for purposes of assisting the less developed of the developing countries and encouraging developmental efforts on the basis of collective self-reliance.
 The United Nations and the international developmental and financial institutions should encourage and support this process.
 At the same time, the North-South dialogue must not be allowed to be marginalized, since it is essential for the growth of a world economy on a firm foundation of partnership to promote common interests and benefits.
 Without this basic element, the chances of promoting a stable world economy indeed seem bleak.
 It can be achieved only through a process that encompasses numerous attributes of human life; education, health, the environment, peace, the economy, society and culture and national and international behaviour all contribute to its achievement.
 The reviews and expert opinions gathered on the Agenda for Development, together with the recent sessions of the Commission on Sustainable Development, indicate that intergovernmental cooperation involving the various agencies of the United Nations, regional organizations and non-governmental organizations must contribute to laying the groundwork for development.
 I do not foresee any easy or quick means of achieving development goals.
 As the representative of a small island State, I pay tribute to all those responsible for the planning and organization of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, which was held in Barbados this year.
 I believe that appropriate recognition has now been given to the special environmental and economic circumstances of small island States in the context of achieving sustainable development.
 But assessment of the need is only a prelude to the implementation of any programme of action.
 What is required is sustained effort by the developing States and technical and other input by the developed countries and international organizations.
 At the same time, we are concerned at the speed at which international conferences are being held and ambitious programmes of action being drawn up without sufficient resources to implement them.
 I make this statement because of the experience we have had following the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio in 1992.
 The expectations which followed that conference have started to recede because of insufficient resources available to implement the programme of action.
 At the same time, it is tragic to note that greater awareness of the predicament on the part of those countries most susceptible to environmental damage only helps to increase apprehensions of disaster and frustration.
 The question of human rights should occupy a central place in our minds when we deal with all issues of global concern.
 The establishment of the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is certainly a most welcome step.
 But this step can have meaningful results only if the necessary resources are provided for the High Commissioner to carry out his mandate fairly and objectively, without any further financial burdens on the membership of this Organization.
 For it is the full understanding of this diversity that reinforces the fabric of what we call international relations and the unity of the membership of this Organization.
 I remain convinced that if this universal Organization is to be successful in meeting the numerous challenges before it, every one of its Members must extend unstinting financial, technological, military and manpower-resource support to the Organization.
 We cannot afford to be complacent, nor can we condone any attempts to deflect the work of the United Nations to any path other than that of right, justice and equality, as enshrined in the Charter.
 What is more, the Government of the Republic of Maldives implicitly trusts the United Nations as the guarantor of its security and as its protector.
 Mr. P\x{5aee}sson (Iceland): May I congratulate Foreign Minister Essy of Ce d'Ivoire on his election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 I am confident that he will steer our work to a successful conclusion, and I pledge him the full support of my delegation.
 I wish also to take this opportunity to express my Government's satisfaction that South Africa, which now takes its place as a full and respected member of the community of nations, has been reinstated in the General Assembly.
 It is a much-vaunted truth that the end of the cold war has released the United Nations from the bondage of a world obsessed with military security.
 Global interdependence is causing greater demands to be made on the United Nations than at any previous time.
 The will to cooperate is gradually replacing the spirit of confrontation throughout the world.
 Though adept at analysing their sources, we are still inclined to deal with conflicts only after they arise instead of preventing them.
 The dangers we face may be novel, but the structures we draw on to cope with them derive from a world that has largely vanished from view.
 In this way, a discrepancy has come about between our expectations of the United Nations and the ability to deliver on them.
 Wherever possible the United Nations should work with its Member States in areas where they are competent and draw to the maximum extent possible on regional organizations.
 In so doing, we reduce the burden on the United Nations and facilitate the setting of priorities.
 Looked at in this perspective, a number of developments over the past 12 months give the United Nations reason for encouragement.
 In Northern Ireland there is for the first time since early this century a realistic chance of lasting peace and stability.
 In the Middle East the breakthrough achieved last year has been consolidated with the Gaza-Jericho Agreement and a peace accord between Israel and Jordan, hopefully paving the way for a comprehensive peace settlement in the entire region.
 In South Africa, the spirit of dialogue has finally triumphed over the forces of hatred and racism, offering a model of tolerance for other countries on the troubled African continent.
 But there have also been setbacks.
 Gross violations of human rights have continued in places as far apart as Haiti and East Timor.
 Unlike the inter-State conflicts which traditionally have preoccupied the United Nations, these are conflicts taking place within the confines of the nation-State, where legitimate authority has either collapsed or been emaciated by civil strife.
 As the Organization adapts itself to the new demands of the post-cold-war era, ways must be found to address such internal crises in full conformity with the United Nations Charter.
 To heed this call, greater attention must now be concentrated on the preventive dimension.
 This is as it should be, and countries contributing substantially to such peace-keeping operations certainly deserve both our gratitude and respect.
 In this connection, I wish to pay special tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, whose agenda for development, submitted two years after his pathbreaking Agenda for Peace, has sharpened our awareness of the need for creating an infrastructure of peace.
 For there to be a stable and lasting infrastructure of peace, a number of elements must be in place: a commitment to democracy and respect for human rights, a sound social fabric, a growing economy and a sustainable natural environment.
 Democracies, as a rule, also tend to honour human rights.
 By promoting tolerance and respect for the dignity of the individual, we contribute to preventing cultural, ethnic and territorial conflicts.
 The effective implementation and monitoring of human rights standards, not least with respect to vulnerable groups, should be a matter of priority for the United Nations.
 The plight of children in some parts of the world gives cause for grave concern.
 The timing is significant as the goals of achieving equality, empowerment and security for women are key to the social agenda of the United Nations as it makes the transition into its second half-century.
 Conversely, where society has broken down or social safety-nets are inadequate, women assume the largest burden.
 There is therefore a direct link between the Fourth World Conference on Women, the recent International Conference on Population and Development held in Cairo and the World Summit for Social Development, to be held in Copenhagen next spring.
 Fifty years after the United Nations avowed in its Charter to promote social progress and better standards of living in greater freedom, the time has come to put sustainable human development at the top of the Organization's agenda.
 My Government therefore strongly welcomes the establishment of the World Trade Organization and urges other signatory States to ratify the Uruguay-Round Agreement without undue delay.
 Focusing on economic progress must not, however, blind us to the need to keep an eye on other areas, which, if neglected, might strip us of the harvest of increased prosperity.
 One such area is the environment.
 Over the past few years the United Nations has made significant headway in its efforts to promote sustainable development worldwide.
 The results of the Rio Conference on Environment and development provide a sound basis for further work.
 As we now assume the momentous task of development, measures must also be taken to protect the environment from detrimental patterns of production and consumption.
 Such considerations notwithstanding, the ecosystem of the sea is now in greater danger than ever before from pollution and overfishing.
 Protecting the oceans against the repercussions of economic and industrial expansion will pose a major challenge to the international community in the years ahead.
 We urge all States and relevant international agencies to participate actively in the preparatory process, commencing officially in Reykjavik in March next year.
 The responsible use of fisheries resources is, however, no less important than combatting the threat of marine pollution.
 The application of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which extended the rule of law to over two thirds of the Earth's surface, has contributed more than any single undertaking to the furtherance of that goal.
 Against this background, Iceland particularly welcomes the fact that this Convention, a crowning achievement in the progressive development of international law under the auspices of the United Nations, will come into force in only a few weeks' time.
 In Iceland's view, this goal could best be achieved by establishing regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements open to States with legitimate interests in the relevant fisheries.
 Such provisions should not, however, be understood as implying approval of existing forms of cooperation based, in some instances, on unilateral decisions by a few States aimed at excluding other neighbouring States, notwithstanding the latter's overwhelming dependence on and proximity to the fisheries in question.
 Indeed, unjustified discrimination would defeat the very aim of establishing a new high seas fisheries regime for the benefit of all nations.
 The global challenge of development calls for bold new thinking, backed by the solid commitment of the international community to the goals enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
 It would certainly be disastrous if the recent transformation of the international security environment were to be undermined by the growing proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
 In addition, the indefinite and unconditional extension of the non-proliferation Treaty would be the single most significant measure against the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
 We are confident that under his able leadership the deliberations of this session will come to a fruitful conclusion.
 My delegation extends its full support to him in carrying out his important duties.
 I also take this opportunity to express my admiration to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for the dedication, commitment and insight with which he has been serving the United Nations.
 Since the end of the cold war the world community has faced many developments, both encouraging and disturbing.
 As a Vice-Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid now dissolved Nepal feels particularly happy about the end of the apartheid regime in South Africa.
 The United Nations role in the establishment of a united democratic and non-racist South Africa has been gratifying to all of us.
 We hope that such achievements will inspire peoples in conflict with each other elsewhere to end their hostilities, and to start similar peace processes.
 It is our hope that with the active support of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in conflict resolution, the United Nations peace-keeping efforts will facilitate the process of restoring normalcy and a peaceful civil society in Rwanda.
 Nepal also appreciates the role played by the OAU in Burundi in terms of conflict prevention, management and resolution.
 We hope that the OAU mechanism will be applied effectively to other troubled parts of the region such as Somalia, Angola and Liberia, in order to restore normalcy.
 Nepal is also deeply distressed by the tragedy which, despite the Security Council's resolutions, continues unabated in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 However, the last five decades, characterized by the cold war, almost paralysed the United Nations.
 The East-West divide seriously hampered the United Nations efforts in most conflict situations.
 A number of important agreements were reached and many peace negotiations were held outside the United Nations.
 Nevertheless, those achievements were in conformity with the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and the United Nations provided an important global forum for discussion, which helped defuse major global catastrophes.
 Since the cold war, whose enormous cost adversely affected the lives of billions of people, is now over, we at the United Nations, standing as it were at the crossroads of history, can now define the Organization's role and work for the next 50 years.
 With such rapid changes taking place in international relations, particularly in recent years, the United Nations needs to be restructured and revitalized.
 We hope that the work of the Open-ended Working Group on the Security Council and related issues will be fruitful in due time.
 Our delegation considers that the reform and expansion of the Security Council should also include measures geared to reforming its working methods and procedures.
 The changed context of international relations and the United Nations preoccupation with peace-keeping operations should not be allowed to deflect attention from efforts to achieve general and complete disarmament under effective international control.
 Rather, the propitious climate now prevailing calls for strengthening the role of the United Nations in arms control and disarmament.
 To this end, the Non-Aligned Movement, of which Nepal is a founding member, has called for a special session of the United Nations General Assembly on disarmament in order to undertake a comprehensive assessment of progress towards global disarmament.
 Like the rest of the international community, Nepal looks forward to the early conclusion of a comprehensive treaty prohibiting nuclear tests in all atmospheres.
 In addition to pursuing confidence-building measures, the United Nations role in arms control and disarmament needs to be effectively strengthened.
 In this context, the United Nations Regional Centres for Peace and Disarmament can play an important role, as they provide much-needed forums for the exchange of views.
 The United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific has already held several meetings to promote such a process of dialogue and interaction.
 Nepal is firm in its conviction that peace-keeping operations, though extremely important, especially in this post-cold-war period, are no substitute for the peaceful resolution of conflicts through political dialogue and mediation.
 Nepal has supported fully the Secretary-General's initiative in expanding preventive diplomacy and conflict resolution.
 Besides serving in Cambodia during the critical stage of democratic elections there, Nepal has also sent civilian police monitors for electoral assistance in Mozambique.
 We would like to pay tribute to those Nepalese soldiers and to the others who gave their lives in the relentless pursuit of international peace and security.
 Since peace-keeping operations have become more complicated and more expensive in recent years, there is greater urgency to make those operations cost-effective and efficient.
 Peace-keeping contributions must be paid in full and on time so that the troop contributing countries may be in a better position to maintain the most critical element in peace-keeping operations the troops.
 My Government holds the firm view that the death and disability compensation to all troops should he based on equity.
 We hope to review the current guidelines on this matter in order to arrive at a standard compensation package applicable to all.
 Nepal welcomes the Secretary-General's initiative on stand-by arrangements for peace-keeping.
 We are studying the proposal seriously, especially in view of current events that highlight the need for the establishment of such an arrangement.
 Since the threat to security lies, inter alia, in non-military sources such as the lack of economic and social development, Nepal stresses the need for timely implementation of Agenda 21 for ensuring the sustainability of the planet for present and future generations.
 The Commission should build a bridge between the North and the South to enable the developing countries to follow the path of sustainable development.
 By providing additional financial resources and transferring environmentally sound technology to developing countries, the international community can surely reach the goals set in Agenda 21.
 In our view, the level of consumption and wastage in most industrialized countries also needs to be moderated if we are to achieve the goals of sustainable development.
 The success of population and socio-economic development programmes hinges on the full empowerment of women.
 The focus given to the empowerment of women in decision-making, especially in planning the size of a family, at the recent International Conference on Population and Development is a mater of satisfaction to my delegation.
 However, the success of the Plan of Action as adopted requires increased financial resources.
 The developing countries, despite their severe resource constraints, have been committing significant amounts in population activities at the cost of other important areas that are required for economic growth and development.
 That important conference will be followed by the World Summit for Social Development, the fourth World Conference on Women and the 1996 United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II).
 A question remains outstanding: that of the availability of the critical resources for the successful implementation of the recommendations of these conferences.
 The developing countries find themselves in an exasperating situation, trying to cope with their responsibilities, as outlined in previous agreements and resolutions, without the necessary actions from the industrialized countries.
 Nepal fully shares the Secretary-General's view that an alternative to the United Nations in the field of development simply does not exist, especially in the light of the new vision of development as inextricably linked with peace and security.
 We reiterate our view that there must be close cooperation and coordination between the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions.
 The main objectives of the proposed agenda for development should he directed towards ensuring successful implementation of existing programmes for the alleviation of poverty.
 The conclusion of the Uruguay Round and the signing of the agreements at Marrakesh undoubtedly constitute a historic breakthrough in the international trade regime.
 The window of opportunity is now open for many developing countries to enhance their trade and development.
 Once again, the least developed countries will be left out, in spite of this tremendous opportunity now available to many.
 The lack of basic physical infrastructure and the absence of a manufacturing base will prevent the least developed countries from taking advantage of this new opportunity.
 The least developed countries, including my own country, have suffered for decades.
 These handicaps, however, have not deterred us from our determination to cooperate fully with the international community by instituting structural adjustment programmes and economic liberalization policies, including privatization.
 Structural adjustment programmes lacking due consideration for social safety nets have pushed a large sector of the world's population towards more misery and discontent. Economic liberalization programmes without adequate institutional and organizational set-ups have not yielded the desired results in many countries.
 The major purpose of the privatization programmes undertaken by many developing countries the efficient and productive use of resources has yet to be fulfilled.
 At the same time, it may be appreciated that these inadequate measures, resulting in higher inflation, a distorted market system and increasing unemployment, may result in greater social tension.
 Violation or suppression of human rights within a nation's boundary have consequences outside its boundaries as well.
 People unable to live in conditions where human rights are suppressed are forced to flee their own homelands and take refuge elsewhere.
 United Nations agencies such as the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the World Food Programme, and international and non-governmental humanitarian organizations, are well aware of this.
 We also feel that the agencies must be mandated to serve all the people in such difficult situations.
 The Constitution of Nepal enshrines the principle of universal human rights.
 We believe that the right to development is an integral part of human rights.
 Nepal is now party to 14 international human rights instruments, including all the major Conventions and Covenants.
 Nepal participated actively in the Second International Conference of New or Restored Democracies, at Managua, Nicaragua, in July this year.
 My delegation is fully confident that our vision of the United Nations as a symbol of peace, security, human rights and development will be realized if Member States demonstrate the political will and provide the necessary financial and material support to the Organization.
 The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.
 I now call on him.
 Mr. Allen (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): As we prepare to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, the memory of the cold war is fading rapidly from our minds.
 We recall the nostalgia with which we heralded the end of the era and the concomitant universal aspirations to a world of peace and prosperity.
 It is against this backdrop, Sir, that we welcome someone with your wide diplomatic experience and wisdom as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Your predecessor, our Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and West Indian brother Ambassador Samuel R. Insanally, has established a superb record of achievements, on which I would like to congratulate him warmly.
 We congratulate Mr. Nelson Mandela and salute his determined march from prison to President.
 He symbolizes the aspirations of the South African people and the values of non-racialism, democracy and peace.
 Indeed, this is a lesson in perseverance and faith in the human spirit.
 The voice of the international community was clearly heard as it worked to mobilize public opinion against the injustice of apartheid, and we are now greatly relieved that the question of its elimination will finally be removed from the agenda of succeeding session of the General Assembly.
 It is our hope that these initiatives signal the beginning of the end of one of the longest standing and most intractable conflicts of our time and that they herald an era of peace, security and political stability in the Middle East.
 We trust that this item will soon secure a place on the agenda of the General Assembly and that when it does every Member State of this noble institution will give its full support to this initiative.
 Certain present-day international political trends, as I mentioned earlier, give us renewed encouragement and hope of relations being conducted between and within States in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
 This, however, does not mean that the world is now free from tension and international disputes.
 Efforts made to date by the international community to halt the aggression by Serbia and Montenegro and to settle the crisis by peaceful means have been in vain.
 The Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines regrets that the recent proposals for a political settlement of the conflict have been rejected by the Bosnian Serbs.
 We urge the Bosnian Serbs to accept the proposals of the Contact Group and to resolve their remaining differences in the spirit of peaceful negotiation and reconciliation, thus taking irreversible steps towards a just and durable peace in Bosnia.
 As a country blessed with freedom and the absence of racial and religious bigotry, we will always raise our voice against any form of ethnic cleansing.
 The vicious cycle of starvation, violence, the breakdown of central authority, and endless conflicts continues to bedevil in varying ways the situation in Somalia, Zaire, Angola, Liberia, Mozambique, Burundi and Rwanda.
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines places a high value on its relations with the Americas since we are part of the same hemisphere.
 We share the same burning desire for meaningful economic, political and social development.
 Over the past decade there has been a noticeable and commendable trend towards democratic rule.
 We are equally delighted to learn that General Cedras has decided to relinquish power, thus paving the way for the return of exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
 My delegation wishes to commend President Clinton for the leadership and determination he has shown in support of the international community's effort to restore democracy to Haiti and hope and dignity to the Haitian people.
 The Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will continue to be an active participant in all arrangements aimed at ensuring the safe return of President Aristide and in the eventual rebuilding process.
 Regrettably, third-world countries like Saint Vincent and the Grenadines feel very strongly that this goal has so far been very elusive. ............
 With the end of the cold war and the relative success of the United Nations in its peace-keeping, peacemaking and peace-enforcement roles, the international community must now attempt to grapple more seriously with the developmental problems faced by third-world countries.
 Today we repeat that call.
 We do not, however, support the creation of new bureaucracies.
 There are already enough institutions.
 This scourge poses a serious threat to the well-being of our people and threatens to destroy the social and moral fabric of our communities.
 The archipelagic nature of our State, its many bays and cays and the mountainous terrain and rich alluvial soil of mainland Saint Vincent are characteristics that attract many visitors to our shores and provide scarce foreign exchange to assist us in the development of our country.
 Due to our limited resources, we are unable to police and control our borders and coastlines effectively.
 At the local level, we have been taking forceful steps to confront this evil pursuing a dynamic drug-abuse-prevention drive and at the same time launching major administrative, legislative and judicial initiatives against the marketing and trafficking of drugs.
 My country has viewed with great interest the measures taken by the Secretary-General to revitalize the United Nations so that it is better prepared to attain the objectives of the Charter.
 In particular, I wish to emphasize the active peace-keeping role of the Organization in the resolution of conflicts that originated before the end of the cold war and of new tensions emerging in hot spots around the world.
 The peace-keeping forces operating under the United Nations flag perform a fundamental role by paving the way to dialogue and negotiation, thus preventing prolonged confrontations.
 However, we feel that the criteria used in financing the forces involved must be re-examined.
 The cost of such operations is beginning to prove quite burdensome for both the Organization and its Member States, especially those, like Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, with a limited resource base.
 We look forward to efforts to alleviate the financial burden placed on small developing States by the frequent deployment of such operations.
 Today, as we prepare to mark an important milestone in the history of the United Nations, and as we approach the beginning of the twenty-first century, we look forward to a world where democracy, peace, sustainable development and human welfare are be available to all.
 Let us continue the struggle and never tire in its pursuit.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on the next speaker, the Minister for External Relations of Mongolia.
 Mr. Gombosuren (Mongolia): May I offer you, Sir, our sincere congratulations on your election to the high post of President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 We are confident that under your able guidance the General Assembly will make significant progress on the important issues before it.
 We express our deep gratitude to Ambassador Samuel Insanally of Guyana for his admirable work during his presidency.
 This historic event testifies to the fact that the purposes and principles that guide the United Nations, including that of respect for human rights, can be translated into reality.
 A number of other meaningful positive developments have taken place on the international scene over the last year, events that are inextricably linked to the tortuous emergence of a new atmosphere in the wake of the cold war.
 As part of the world-wide preparations for this event, a committee has been established in Mongolia to coordinate national activities.
 It is against this background that we see the special significance of this session of the General Assembly, which is to lay a sound foundation for the anniversary.
 The Secretary-General's report entitled An Agenda for Development is a highlight of this session of the General Assembly.
 My delegation expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for producing a thought-provoking report which offers a comprehensive approach to development and innovative ideas for consideration.
 We hope that the upcoming discussion of that report will help in the search for an adequate response to persistent inequalities and imbalances, as well as ways to combat the abject poverty, external debt burden and environmental degradation that negatively affect the developing countries.
 An active South-South cooperation is of vital importance for the sustainable development and self-reliance of the developing countries.
 The problems facing the countries in transition and the need for international cooperation to overcome them have found, in our view, a proper reflection in the Agenda.
 Furthermore, this cooperation should be tailored to the yspecific conditions of countries in transition.
 In the case of Mongolia, aside from such handicaps as a low level of development and a disadvantageous geographical location, our economy, in fact, finds itself dependent on another crisis-stricken country in transition.
 We believe that the time has come to make every effort to resolve the external debt problem of developing countries, taking into account the vital interests of their socio-economic development and the urgent need to lay the foundation for equitable economic cooperation.
 One might add that the realistic assessment of the underlying political and economic causes of the multiplying debt burden should be borne in mind in addressing this issue.
 The successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round and the ensuing decision to create the World Trade Organization represent an important step towards a fairer trading system.
 We hope that the entry into force of the Convention on the Law of the Sea will facilitate the solution of problems confronting, above all, the least developed, land-locked and geographically disadvantaged States.
 The post-Rio period has registered a welcome shift towards the broadening of international cooperation in addressing environmental issues.
 Nevertheless, we have to admit that there is a significant disparity between the importance that the international community attaches to this problem and the actual results of the work done in protecting the environment and halting the ecological crisis and remedying its consequences.
 In this regard, I wish to emphasize that commitments, especially those related to the flow of financial resources and the transfer of technology, have to be faithfully honoured.
 As a country exposed to drought and desertification, Mongolia welcomes the conclusion of the negotiations on, and the signing of, the international Convention to combat desertification.
 We trust that the Summit will serve as a powerful engine for marshalling political will at the highest level and will bring about a viable action programme to effectively address social challenges.
 This Summit, taken together with the recent International Conference on Population and Development and the future conferences on women and on human settlements constitute an intertwined continuous process of international consensus building.
 Mongolia is advancing along the road of reforms, relying on the active support of the donor community and of international organizations.
 The International Monetary Fund-supported enhanced structural adjustment facility programme is in its second year of implementation.
 There is a positive trend towards checking economic decline and inflation and stabilizing the national currency.
 The role of the private sector in the national economy is growing considerably.
 Yet underlying problems continue to persist.
 In this respect, we are looking forward to the fourth donor meeting to be held in Tokyo this November.
 As hardships seem to persist, the practice of holding regular donor meetings under the auspices of Japan and the World Bank remains essential.
 We trust that we will receive support and understanding from the parties concerned.
 However, this is not to say that we are pursuing a lopsided approach to overcoming the crisis and implementing structural economic adjustments, relying solely on outside assistance and ideas.
 Proceeding from this premise, we endeavour to attract foreign investment, including private investment, and to create the necessary legal, economic and other conditions.
 For any State, and for small States in particular, peace and stability in their respective regions are of vital importance.
 By and large, positive trends are prevailing in our region, despite the continued existence of hotbeds of conflict and tension.
 An important factor contributing to these trends is the development of Russian-Chinese relations and cooperation within the framework of friendly partnership.
 Mongolia welcomes the recent agreement between Russia and China not to target each other with strategic nuclear missiles; we see this as a development that augurs well for stability and confidence-building in the region and beyond.
 The maintenance of good-neighbourly relations with these two countries is of paramount importance to Mongolia, and today these relations are based on new Treaties on friendly relations and cooperation.
 As opposed to the headway made in resolving and preventing crisis situations in Asia, there seems to be no discernible shift for the better on the Korean Peninsula.
 The agreement between the Government of Tajikistan and the opposition group on a temporary cease-fire constitutes a first, important step towards national reconciliation in Tajikistan, and should be built upon.
 Last year's truly historic developments in the Middle East paved the way for the positive steps that we are witnessing today in the efforts to bring peace to the region, inching towards a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict.
 We hope that the United States-Cuba bilateral agreement on the immigration question will prove to have a far-reaching impact on resolving the outstanding issues between these two countries.
 Bold steps are needed, particularly by the nuclear-weapon States, to solve the mutually interlinked problems of the indefinite extension of the non-proliferation Treaty and the conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty in 1995, as well as credible security assurances for the non-nuclear-weapon States.
 It is gratifying to note that the five nuclear-weapon States supported Mongolia's declaration of its territory as a nuclear-weapon-free zone and expressed their intention to respect that status.
 The Non-Aligned Movement has also welcomed that initiative as a commendable contribution to regional stability and confidence-building.
 The unchecked arms trade and its increase to global proportions, and especially its extension into volatile and unstable regions of the world, is fraught with dangerous consequences.
 Considerable progress has been achieved in implementing the Jakarta Final Document, which epitomized the new strategy of the Movement in the post-cold-war era.
 The Cairo Ministerial Conference, held last June, contributed to the enhancement of the Movement's activities.
 Here, I should also like to mention that this Conference emphasized the need to augment the Movement's efforts with a view to adequately responding to common problems facing the developing countries.
 In the wake of the cold-war policy that limited the capacity of the United Nations to implement fully the purposes and principles of its Charter, new opportunities have opened up before the world Organization.
 The United Nations has exerted a great deal of effort, and it can be credited with impressive accomplishments, especially in the areas of peace-keeping and humanitarian assistance.
 Nevertheless, many Member States have voiced their concern over and criticism of the restructuring of the United Nations and have stressed the need to ensure a proper balance in its activities.
 We can well understand the justified criticism that our Organization is disproportionately preoccupied with peace-keeping and security issues at the expense of its urgent development agenda.
 We expect that with deliberations on and the subsequent adoption of the Agenda for Development there will be less grounds for such criticism.
 My delegation hopes that the ongoing deliberations in the Working Group on this issue will be intensified and successfully concluded by the fiftieth session of the General Assembly.
 We commend and support the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, in his efforts to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the Secretariat.
 We are confident that the Secretary-General will persevere in his reform process, and wish him every success in his future endeavours.
 The Mongolian people is approaching an auspicious event, which will be observed this coming November namely, the seventieth anniversary of the proclamation of the Republic, which represents an important juncture in restoring our independence.
 My people has accomplished since then an arduous journey marked by ups and downs.
 Today we are continuing our reforms in line with our democratic Constitution of 1992.
 In keeping with its foreign policy concept, Mongolia will continue to endeavour to make its own contribution to the common cause of developing friendly relations and cooperation between nations and ensuring peace, security and progress.
 I now call on him.
 Mr. Turnquest (Bahamas): I wish to join other speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Your experience in international affairs, as well as your proven diplomatic skills, provide the assurance of a successful conclusion of our deliberations.
 We commend him for his performance.
 Our Secretary-General continues his outstanding stewardship of the United Nations during these critical times, when this world body is increasingly being called upon to respond to crises of staggering dimensions.
 The Bahamas appreciates his tireless efforts.
 Anniversaries are times of celebration and times of reflection.
 As this world assembly approaches its fiftieth birthday, it is wholly appropriate that we should seek to evaluate our record.
 I believe that we can all agree that in our efforts to guide international relations in the 50 years since the end of the Second World War, there have been both successes and failures.
 We must surely build on the successes and redirect our energies to effectively reduce the number of failures.
 The credible success of this world Organization and its specialized agencies in measurably improving the health, literacy and education standards of the world's poor is no mean achievement.
 So also has been the success of this body in seeking to ensure the environmental integrity of the planet, in galvanizing the resources of the world to fight the illicit drug traffic, and in peacefully resolving disputes.
 We can all be justly satisfied that the persistence of this Assembly played a pivotal role in bringing to an end the racist Government in South Africa.
 President Nelson Mandela and the people of South Africa can be fully assured of my Government's hand of friendship.
 Victory in South Africa allowed us to dare to hope for an opening in Haiti.
 This Assembly knows very well the long history of abuse of that poor Caribbean nation a land in which the apartheid of wealth has flourished in a destitute country.
 For many generations now, Haitian nationals have felt compelled to abandon their homes, frequently in unseaworthy boats, in search of personal dignity and of economic and political liberty.
 My country has frequently been their first safe harbour, and, while proud of our record of assistance, we have been and remain ill-equipped to offer such refuge.
 Members are aware of the tremendous burden that my country has had to bear in this regard.
 This refuge has been provided by the Bahamas in spite of the absence of either recognition or assistance from the international community.
 When we add the extra costs attributable to the necessary marine patrols associated with the monitoring of undocumented persons, the full burden created in the Bahamas by Haitian nationals fleeing their homes begins to become apparent.
 Hence, the recognition by this body of the absolute necessity for the world community to forcibly respond to the brutality of the military dictatorship in Haiti is very much appreciated.
 The support given to the early initiative led by the Caribbean Community to force a resolution of the crisis in Haiti has already borne fruit, and we commend the United States of America for its leadership in this important initiative.
 We therefore join in welcoming the formation of the multinational force authorized by the Security Council to take all necessary action to restore the democratically elected government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
 Notwithstanding the tremendous costs that in recent years have accrued to the Bahamas as a result of developments in Haiti, we have also agreed to lend manpower support to that force.
 Today's announcement that the coup leaders have resigned and will be leaving the country now paves the way for the desired return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide later this week.
 It is especially important that the international community now dedicate sufficient funding and expertise to the economic reconstruction of Haiti to achieve democracy in that land.
 It must continue to do so even today as Haitians await the announced departure of the feared military from leadership and the return of their elected President.
 The infant democracy that is struggling to be born in Haiti will surely die unless it receives the succour and support of the international community.
 Since the Second World War, the world community has addressed the plight of political refugees.
 The increased demand to assist persons fleeing political persecution is demonstrated in the ethnic purges and warfare in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 The dramatic exodus, during the first half of this year, of hundreds of thousands of persons across the seas on unseaworthy craft or down long roads across borders dramatically brought to the attention of the world community the plight of undocumented persons seeking shelter outside of their homelands.
 The burden borne by the Bahamas as a result of the presence of large numbers of undocumented Haitians is now compounded by the more recent arrival of hundreds of Cubans seeking to enter the United States of America.
 The Bahamas Government is encouraged by recent efforts by both the United States of America and the Republic of Cuba to address this perennial problem of Cuban migrants.
 The real threat to our future security is therefore no longer military aggression but deteriorating economic conditions.
 The alleviation of widespread poverty while managing finite resources in the face of spiralling population growth will be among the major challenges of the twenty-first century.
 The Bahamas, therefore, looks forward to the Secretary-General's revised Agenda for Development, hopeful that it will serve as an effective guideline for the creation and implementation of measures commensurate with the legitimate aspirations of Member States.
 We must, rather, focus on the different levels of development that exist in our several countries.
 These solutions must include programmes specially suited to the differing levels of development of Member States.
 We must consider sustainable human development with a focus on justice, equality and democratic freedom as well as on material well-being that incorporates equal opportunity for all.
 The Bahamas, in spite of its apparent growth and strong economic indicators, is still only a developing nation.
 However, unlike many other developing nations, the Bahamas is continually frustrated in its efforts to secure international resources and concessionary financing from multilateral institutions because of its reputed level of per capita gross national product.
 For its part, the Bahamas is engaged in a process of refining its development indicators in an attempt to ensure that data provided to international institutions are truly reflective of our economic-development reality.
 We expect that the data so provided will also have an impact upon our budgetary assessments.
 Among its new achievements are the recognition of the legal status of archipelagos, the 12-mile territorial sea, transit passage, the exclusive economic zone, and the protection and preservation of the marine environment and the resources of the deep seabed as the common-heritage of mankind.
 The Bahamas was particularly pleased to join with other Member States in signing the agreement on seabed mining in July of this year, as that agreement modifies provisions that had prevented many States from becoming parties to the Convention.
 The long awaited entry into force of the Convention is therefore of extreme importance, as it provides a boost to our efforts to curb infringement on both our national security and our national resources.
 While the socio-economic health of the world still presents challenges for the Organization, we have scored some political successes in the recent past.
 These successes include, of course, the peace accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed in September of last year, which led to self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho for the Palestinian people, and the signing of the Washington Declaration between Israel and Jordan last July.
 We also applaud and encourage the dialogue now under way between Israel and Syria.
 In spite of those successes, peace-keeping still occupies an important place in our activities.
 After all, development is a prerequisite for peace.
 Our Organization is expected to reflect universality and to demonstrate impartiality when forging international agreements for policy commitments, for accessing resources and for action.
 The Group's work thus far has been positive and constructive, and we trust that the momentum of its discussions will be maintained.
 As its conclusions affect each Member quite directly, it is essential that the Council should be seen to reflect as accurately as possible the wishes of the entire international community.
 Turning fifty is an opportunity for the Organization to regain the confidence of our peoples.
 It will take hard work and determination to achieve the desired results so that over the next 50 years the United Nations will be known in all societies and across all levels of those societies as the real leader in the fight to bring dignity to mankind.
 And watered the furrows with tears.
 It is not just as we take it, This mystical world of ours;
 Life's field will yield as we make it:
 A harvest of thorns or of flowers.
 Mr. Haggar (Chad) (interpretation from French): Allow me, Sir, to convey to you on behalf of the people and Government of Chad, our heartfelt congratulations on your unanimous election to preside over the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
 It was a resounding tribute to your country, whose devotion to peace and dialogue is well known.
 Not simply Ce d'Ivoire, but the whole of Africa has thus been honoured.
 We should like to take this opportunity to salute the memory of the late President F\x{5e68}ix Houphou\x{892e}-Boigny, whose renown as a statesman extended beyond our continent.
 Finally, I wish to express our profound gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his dedication to international peace and security, to which he has contributed with An Agenda for Peace, now supplemented by An Agenda for Development.
 We welcome it and wish every success to President Nelson Mandela, whose tenacity should once again be commended.
 The evolving peace process in the Middle East is an important step towards the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of a crisis which has persisted for too long.
 We pay warm tribute to the Israeli and Palestinian leaders who, with their foresightedness and sense of history, have taken this decisive step.
 We also commend the efforts now going on to restore democracy to Haiti.
 Chad has also been following with interest the process under way in Mozambique, and we hope that the elections to be held on 27 and 28 October will pave the way to a new era of peace and prosperity.
 Chad urges the United Nations to continue its tireless, energetic peacemaking and peace-keeping efforts and asks the parties involved in any conflict to attach greater importance to dialogue.
 The proliferation of armed conflicts in Africa is a great challenge to us.
 Conflicts of any kind are always a disaster for the human race.
 Therefore, in order to save present and future generations from the danger of a nuclear holocaust, my country supports the indefinite extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
 Conventional weapons are a permanent source of concern for Chad. That is why we support resolution 48/75 E and welcome the initiative by President Alpha Omar Konare of Mali to halt the proliferation of such weapons in our region.
 Economic development is a constant concern of the international community.
 That is why the various initiatives and discussions on the subject, as well as the apt analysis in the Agenda for Development, deserve careful consideration at this session.
 This explains the spread of phenomena such as juvenile delinquency, widespread drug-trafficking and organized crime.
 They will give the international community an opportunity to discuss today's challenges and to try to improve the lives of millions of human beings.
 The Sovereign National Conference organized, in a spirit of transparency, with the participation of citizens of Chad of all strata and all political leanings in the presence of foreign observers, adopted a consistent, comprehensive strategy.
 It thus reflected the general consensus on resolving all our problems, and in particular the creation of a State that respects the rule of law.
 At the last session, my delegation took note of progress made towards democratization.
 I am happy to say from this rostrum that the transition in Chad is proceeding normally thanks to cooperation between the three organs, the presidency, the primature and the Higher Transitional Council.
 That committee has already achieved some results by signing certain agreements with some organizations, in particular the Bangui II Agreement.
 At the same time the national reconciliation committee is continuing its contacts with other political and military groups.
 Considerable progress has been made in the restructuring of the national army but much remains to be done because of the complexity of the problem of demobilizing elements and reintegrating them into civilian life.
 Equally important progress has also been made in other areas.
 For almost four years now we have seen the unprecedented establishment of several independent newspapers, the formation of many political parties, 49 of which have been legalized, and the creation of unions and human rights associations.
 The recent establishment of the Supreme Council for Communications is another guarantee of freedom of expression, opinion and information.
 My country, which has experienced one of the most cruel and misguided dictatorships, attaches great importance to the promotion and defence of these rights.
 The Government of the Republic of Chad is therefore surprised that certain press organs, certain human rights associations and organizations, manipulated by those who are fighting for power, have launched a campaign that is seeking to mislead international opinion by spreading false information about Chad.
 I wish to draw attention to the special situation in my country, where there are many political and military groups equipped with weapons, as a consequence of the long conflict. The abuses committed by uncontrolled groups cannot and should not be attributed to Government policy to violate human rights.
 On 7 October 1994 His Excellency Colonel Idriss D\x{5db5}y, Head of State, once again reaffirmed his determination to respect the timetable for the elections to give the country reliable democratic institutions, inter alia, to guarantee the rights of all citizens.
 Accordingly, we ask our traditional partners to assist the Government of Chad to conclude this delicate mission which require many resources.
 On 3 February 1994 the International Court of Justice in its Judgment put an end to this 20-year-old conflict.
 I wish to reiterate my sincere thanks to all those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the peaceful solution of this dispute and our gratitude to the United Nations.
 This fortunate outcome, which reflects the pre-eminence of negotiation over confrontation, is a reason for hope in the matter of prevention and resolution of conflicts.
 We should also create an environment conducive to all these actions by carrying out mine clearance and disinfecting wells that were poisoned during the occupation.
 Chad, like many other countries in Africa, is confronting an unprecedented economic and financial crisis.
 Existing difficulties have been compounded by the devaluation of the CFA franc, which has wiped out all the efforts by the Government within the structural adjustment framework.
 My country regrets the fact that the steps to accompany the devaluation have not been entirely honoured.
 We urge some of our partners to comply with their commitments in this respect.
 We hope that the provisions of the Convention will not remain a dead letter.
 We are working together with our various partners, United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations to deal with these situations following appeals made respectively by the Ministers of Agriculture and Health.
 To meet the many challenges we must adapt to present changes.
 Therefore my country supports the common African position on restructuring and the revitalization of the United Nations in the economic, social and related fields.
 In the light of ongoing discussion of this question, we reiterate this position because it is a requirement of our time.
 I cannot conclude my statement without saying that we hope that the work of the present session will yield answers to our legitimate concerns.
 The President (interpretation from French): The next speaker is the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Equatorial Guinea, on whom I now call.
 I wish you every success and assure you of the complete cooperation of my delegation.
 Please convey my congratulations also to the other members of the General Committee, whose work is not always given due recognition.
 And I wish to express special appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our distinguished Secretary-General, for his deep commitment to the search for viable solutions to the problems and difficulties confronting mankind today.
 It is illogical and inconceivable to the peoples of our world that after the fall of the ideological borders that shaped the bipolar world, we should again be confronted with new burdens and contradictions.
 In record time, we have seen evidence of many sources of tension and conflicts that wipe out many years of United Nations efforts.
 This forty-ninth session of our General Assembly must therefore reflect deeply in order to find a global solution to these common denominators of all our countries.
 The Republic of Equatorial Guinea wishes to reaffirm here, from this rostrum, the confidence that it has placed in the United Nations and our conviction that this Organization is the ideal framework for resolving the difficult, delicate and complex problems confronting the international community.
 In this grim international panorama, my country, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, is endeavouring to preserve internal peace and political stability, and to maintain a strict policy of good-neighbourliness and cooperation with the other countries of central Africa.
 In this framework, we have been strengthening the internal socio-political structures that make it possible to coordinate an integral, democratic system that guarantees the individual and collective freedoms of our citizens.
 Indeed in 1991, the Government began a transition on the basis of established constitutional provisions and has been establishing the political environment conducive to political pluralism and a multiparty system.
 Therefore, the fact is that Equatorial Guinea today is a free, democratic and independent country where peace and stability prevail.
 With only 400,000 inhabitants, we have 14 political organizations that operate freely and democratically and constitute the pluralist expression of our peoples.
 None the less, as everyone knows, there are some who, because of their concealed interests, have attempted, and continue to attempt, to thwart the will of some of our political leaders in our democratic process.
 Regarding this campaign of disinformation, there is a saying that I would like to reiterate here: The truth is one, but untruth is manifold.
 Everything depends on the colour of the lens through which one looks.
 We ask that you view us through a clear lens that will allow you to see the reality.
 We see some countries now using the international community's demand for respect for human rights and democracy to mask activities that are aimed at subjugating developing countries such as Equatorial Guinea.
 They have done excellent work.
 We believe that the escalation of domestic tensions in many African countries today has a common cause: political intolerance, fuelled and promoted by foreign intervention in a country's domestic jurisdiction.
 However, as the saying goes, The master's eye makes the horse fat in other words, however they may be assessed or distorted from outside, the realities in each of the countries in those regions exist independently of the interpretations placed on them.
 We in Equatorial Guinea believe that development and democracy can be promoted only in an atmosphere of peace.
 We therefore feel that the United Nations should put emphasis on its efforts at preventive action rather than those designed to restore peace or serve as a buffer.
 Measures such as the dispatch of evaluation or inquiry missions to individual countries can be more effective in avoiding conflicts like those currently taking place in such fraternal and friendly countries as Angola, Rwanda, Liberia, Somalia, the former Yugoslavia and so on.
 Interventions after the fact have been shown to have limited effectiveness.
 Some peace-keeping missions and operations in certain conflict areas have also undergone a qualitative change.
 It is therefore urgent to redirect the mechanisms through which the Organization functions and adapt them to the changes in today's world.
 It is hardly useful for some to attempt to monopolize the solution to the world's problems if we do not all feel sincerely involved.
 My country hopes that the new world scene will witness the implementation of procedures for sincere international cooperation on behalf of those countries that need it most, those countries that are struggling not just to maintain the quality of life but often for their very survival.
 The poverty and misery in all the countries on Earth calls for action by others to remedy their plight.
 United Nations efforts in the maintenance of international peace and security contrast with the limited progress achieved in economic and social development.
 The global chasm separating rich and poor is steadily widening.
 We need the solidarity of the industrialized countries, on mutually agreed terms, if we developing countries are to find a definitive solution to our external-debt problem, the burden of which is another obstacle to progress and greater social development.
 It would be most promising if agreement could be reached on the mechanisms to solve this economic, financial and socio-economic problem.
 One such mechanism might be a re-examination of the idea of converting external debt into investment and into projects with proven social impact.
 The 1972 Stockholm Declaration established the foundations for some universal principles for the protection of the global environment and efforts to control pollution and combat desertification and deforestation.
 Reality, however, called for new initiatives, which culminated in the Rio Conference on Environment and Development.
 We hope that the results of that Conference will be of benefit to all and help ensure mankind's the sustainable development and future well-being.
 Fitting compensation must be forthcoming, particularly through the funding of alternative projects and technological cooperation.
 Within its modest financial means, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has been and remains ready to take action to improve its national environment as its contribution to the task of preserving nature throughout the world.
 From this rostrum we are appealing to the international community to join us in our efforts to speed and support work in these sectors.
 For all those reasons, we hope that the United Nations will continue to enjoy the full support of all of us in working to achieve a better world in the coming 50 years.
 Mr. Tshering (Bhutan): I have the honour to convey to you, Mr. President, and, through you, to all the delegations here present the warm greetings and good wishes of His Majesty Jigme Singye Wangchuck, King of Bhutan, for the success of the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
 Given your long association and intimate knowledge of the United Nations, we are sure you will provide the necessary direction on the many important issues that we are about to take up during this session.
 His innovative and vigorous pursuit of discussions on the reform of the United Nations, the restructuring of the Security Council and the hearings on development have set the stage for the current discussions.
 We should like to pay a tribute to our Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his distinguished leadership.
 We appreciate his tireless efforts to steer the United Nations in bold and new directions.
 We had the opportunity to welcome President Mandela and to hear his historic and enlightened address in this Hall.
 In the Middle East, the transition of the Gaza Strip and Jericho to Palestinian self-government, the return of President Yasser Arafat and the signing of the Washington Declaration between Jordan and Israel clearly demonstrate the increasing desire for peace in the region.
 The international community must reject any threat against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kuwait.
 Prince Sisowath Sirirath (Cambodia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 The problems in Rwanda, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Haiti and many other parts of the world still demand the careful and urgent attention of the United Nations.
 These conflicts severely test the international community's capacity and resolve to deal with humanitarian needs and conflict resolution.
 We welcome the continued reduction of nuclear weapons and the turning-away of such weapons from their previous targets.
 We support the extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons beyond 1995 and the proposal for the negotiation of a comprehensive test ban.
 We urge the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to continue negotiations in earnest and to comply with the International Atomic Energy Agency's safeguards agreement; thereby avoiding suspicion and doubt.
 The manufacture of, trade in and deployment of such weapons, which cause indiscriminate and mindless death and maiming, are unconscionable.
 The scope of the exercise should be expanded to include not only trade but also manufacture and stockpiling.
 The discussions continue, but, so far, little, if any, substantive reform has taken place.
 In our humble view, reform of the United Nations must reflect the perceptions and expectations of all Members.
 For many of the larger Member States, the United Nations is a forum in which to project and promote national policies.
 But in the case of the developing countries in particular, the smaller Member States the United Nations guarantees independence and sovereignty and provides an opportunity to participate in international dialogue.
 It must also organize itself in such a way that it can deal more effectively with its business.
 Routine and symbolic resolutions must be dealt with efficiently, allowing the Assembly to focus on new and more important challenges.
 It is a common mistake to think that these two bodies function like the legislature and the executive of a government.
 This myth has been perpetuated by decades of Security Council paralysis and by the artificial prominence achieved by the General Assembly through the passing of ineffective but symbolically important resolutions.
 The Council's decisions are binding on all Members. They carry the sanction of international law.
 The Council must be expanded to reflect the new realities of international relations and to make it a more representative body.
 The sudden and quantum jump in expenditure on peace-keeping operations now more than three times greater than expenditure on development is becoming difficult to sustain.
 We do not object to peace-keeping operations, but it is clear that the finances of the United Nations must be put on a sound footing.
 Financial expenditures reflect the direction and priorities of the United Nations, as well as the commitment of its Members.
 The Secretary-General, in his report entitled An Agenda for Development, states:
 These statements provide, in brief form, the best rationale for recommitment to development in the post-cold-war era.
 Like peace, development is not a new issue before the United Nations; the United Nations and its agencies have been engaged in international development for decades.
 What is alarming today is that the gap between the standards of living of developed and of developing countries the rich and the poor is growing.
 Poverty saps the human spirit.
 Poverty weakens the body, making it susceptible to sickness and disease.
 Poverty clouds the mind, making it difficult for people to understand the circumstances of their deprivation, and generating bitterness against those they perceive as the cause of their misery.
 What is unfortunate is that in this day and age, given the advances that mankind has made in science and technology, commerce and industry and civil and social thought, poverty need not exist.
 Considerable efforts have been made to put into proper perspective the major development issues of our time.
 We have no doubt that the international community will approach the World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women, to be held in 1995, with the same resolve and determination.
 All countries are working hard to translate the commitments into action, but the resources available are insufficient for effective and lasting intervention.
 While there seem to be many avenues for increasing the transfer of resources, the reality is that they have yielded little for most least-developed countries.
 International banking and investments are highly selective and, by their nature, will not be attracted to the least-developed countries, many of which have a small economy and a poor infrastructure.
 The capacity of the least-developed countries to compete in international trade is also limited.
 It is ironic that resources for international development should decline when the United Nations agencies are embarking on a major thrust for poverty alleviation and sustainable human development.
 We urge the donor community to continue supporting the United Nations funding agencies.
 These agencies must regain the confidence of the donor community through greater efficiency and better coordination.
 Credit is an essential form of input in any major development effort.
 The crushing debt burden of many developing countries and the manner in which future credit requirements will have to be met must be clearly dealt with in our dialogue on development.
 Our discussions must include the role of the Bretton Woods institutions, which must be made to work in harmony with the efforts of United Nations agencies.
 To this end Bhutan has committed itself to maintaining 60 per cent of its land mass under forest cover, including 20 per cent as national parks.
 All development activities have been built around this approach.
 We have been fortunate to receive the generous assistance of, among others, India, Switzerland, Japan, Denmark, the Netherlands, Austria, Norway, Kuwait, Germany, Australia and the United Kingdom.
 The fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations is a time for celebration.
 The President (interpretation from French): Several representatives wish to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
 May I remind members that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to 5 minutes for the second intervention and should be made by delegations from their seats.
 Paraguay declares its deep concern at the situation affecting the Pilcomayo River, which is an international waterway inasmuch as its source is in Bolivia and it forms the border between Argentina and Paraguay.
 Argentina is deeply committed to a policy that deals with the problem of the environment and sustainable development at the national, regional and global levels.
 As for the comments made on the Pilcomayo River, Argentina has taken part in costly projects, agreed upon between Argentina and Paraguay in November 1991, designed to mitigate the effects of the blocking of the Pilcomayo River in both countries.
 In fulfilment of the agreements of November 1991, Argentina properly and punctually completed the projects it was supposed to carry out in its territory, but the projects that are to be carried out in the territory of the Republic of Paraguay are still not completed.
 For this reason we consider it inappropriate to attribute the responsibility for the damage done to the Chaco region of Paraguay to the projects carried out in Argentine territory.
 We therefore regard as essential the ongoing participation of the Republic of Bolivia in the talks on this subject.
 Mr. Zacharakis (Greece): I do not think there is really any need to take much of the Assembly's time for a lengthy reply to the Albanian representative, who on 7 October spoke in exercise of the right of reply to my statement of 5 October.
 Quite simply, while he assumes that he has given an answer to me, he has not, in fact, responded to the plethora of statements, summonses, appeals and accusations of the international organizations, non-governmental organizations and observers that I quoted in my statement.
 Well, the truth is that there is indeed a report of Professor Rjeplinski, entitled Report from the CSCE/Office of the Director of Human Rights Trial Observation in Tirane, Albania, dated 6 September, which has been circulated in the CSCE and will also be circulated in the United Nations.
 The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
 I will announce the dates for the consideration of those agenda items in due course and sufficiently in advance.
 I will also keep the Assembly informed of any additions or changes.
 I therefore appeal to those representatives submitting draft resolutions to do so sufficiently in advance of the dates fixed for consideration of items in order to give members adequate time to examine them.
 I should also like to remind representatives that additional time is needed for those draft resolutions involving changes in the work programme or additional expenditures, since these will require the preparation of a statement of programme-budget implications by the Secretary-General.
 Furthermore, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee will need adequate time to review the programme-budget implications of a draft resolution before the latter can be acted on by the Assembly.
 Mr. Ssemogerere (Uganda): Permit me, Sir, on behalf of the Uganda delegation, to congratulate you most warmly on your well-deserved unanimous election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Your election is a recognition by our Organization of your exemplary personal qualities.
 It is, indeed, a great honour to your country, Ce d'Ivoire, with which Uganda enjoys warm fraternal relations.
 I am confident that, with your skills and experience, you will be able to guide our deliberations to a successful conclusion.
 I wish to pledge Uganda's full support and cooperation to you in your endeavours.
 Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his courageous and clear-sighted leadership of the Organization.
 I wish to pay a special tribute to His Excellency President Nelson Mandela and other leaders of the South African liberation movements, and to Mr. de Klerk, for their vision and statesmanship, which enabled the United Nations to achieve one of the key long-sought objectives of Africa.
 Since the last session of the General Assembly, several developments have taken place in the international arena; some of these have offered hope and encouragement, while others have led to frustration and despair.
 In many countries, peace, the rule of law and democratic governance are being consolidated.
 However, in some others, such as Angola, Somalia, Liberia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, conflicts have caused untold suffering, loss of life and destruction of property, and have contributed to the staggering numbers of refugees and displaced persons, with the attendant negative consequences.
 Most of these refugees and displaced persons have fled as a consequence of conflicts, mainly within nations, but to a lesser extent between nations.
 We agree with his view that security, socio-economic well-being, environmental sustainability and the protection of human rights are closely interdependent and interlocked in a mutually reinforcing manner.
 They should therefore be addressed in tandem in order to avert conflicts and their attendant negative effects, such as the outflow of political and economic refugees, capital flight and brain drain.
 We welcome the establishment of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution.
 Such a mechanism is useful for confidence-building among rival parties and can facilitate peaceful resolution of conflicts.
 Uganda is committed to making the OAU Mechanism effective and usable.
 The situation in Somalia remains tense and fragile with serious negative implications for peace, national reconciliation and orderly provision of humanitarian assistance.
 We commend the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) for facilitating the flow of humanitarian assistance and we urge continued international support to Somalia.
 As regards Liberia, Uganda was encouraged by steps taken to begin the implementation of the Cotonou Agreement, namely the establishment of the Liberia National Transitional Government and the initiation of the process of disarmament and demobilization of various combatants.
 However, we are disappointed by the increasingly tense military situation on the ground, both within and between parties, which has brought the process of disarmament and demobilization to a virtual standstill.
 We urge all parties to show seriousness to the process of peace and national reconciliation as this is vital for continued international support and a continued presence.
 Uganda welcomes steps taken so far by the Government of Mozambique and RENAMO to implement the general peace agreement.
 We commend the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (UNOMOZ), which has helped to engender confidence among the parties vital for the successful implementation of the peace agreement and we urge continued international assistance to Mozambique, especially in the resettlement of refugees and displaced persons.
 The situation in Angola remains a matter of concern to the international community despite ongoing Lusaka negotiations between the Government of Angola and UNITA.
 My delegation urges the parties concerned, especially UNITA, to demonstrate flexibility, realism, political will, tolerance and compromise, which are necessary for peace and national reconciliation.
 We urge the parties to the conflict to set their sights on the common good and mutual accommodation in the ongoing regional efforts in particular, the Inter-Governmental Authority for Drought and Development (IGADD) initiative which are aimed at finding a durable political settlement.
 As regards Western Sahara, Uganda is concerned at the slow progress towards the holding of a United Nations supervised referendum on self-determination of the people of that territory.
 We appeal to the parties to overcome their differences and enable a just and impartial referendum to be effected.
 The systematic and widespread massacres of civilians which took place in Rwanda were tragic and deplorable.
 Uganda supports the setting up by the Secretary-General, on 29 July 1994, of an impartial commission of experts to investigate violations of international humanitarian law and acts of genocide committed in Rwanda with a view to identifying persons responsible for those violations and bringing them to justice.
 This should contribute to the process of national reconciliation.
 Uganda notes the flexibility shown by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya with regard to implementation of Security Council resolution 731 (1992).
 We hope that this will contribute to a peaceful resolution of the problem.
 Uganda welcomes the initiation of Palestine self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
 We commend Chairman Arafat and Prime Minister Rabin for their political steadfastness, which made this possible.
 We encourage them to continue working together to resolve all outstanding issues for the full implementation of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
 We express our satisfaction over the signing by Jordan and Israel of the Washington Declaration by which the two countries mutually agreed to end the state of war between them.
 This should go a long way in helping to build confidence, facilitating the normalization of relations, concluding a formal peace treaty between the two countries and between Israel and other countries in the region.
 Uganda is deeply concerned over the continuing genocide and "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 Uganda is encouraged by some positive developments that have taken place in the area of disarmament.
 As a State Party to the NPT, and in the context of the preparatory process and review of the Treaty, Uganda will seek the removal of all imbalances in the NPT and the securing of adequate technical assistance for developing countries in the peaceful application of nuclear technology.
 We also note the progress that is being made to strengthen the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction through measures such as mandatory data exchanges and periodic on-site visits.
 These measures are useful in engendering confidence in compliance and in helping minimize violations of the Convention.
 The treaty on an African nuclear-free zone will be yet another important landmark for peace in Africa.
 It is imperative to consolidate achievements so far recorded in the area of nuclear testing and non-proliferation in order to lay firm ground on which to make progress in other new and more challenging areas of disarmament.
 We reaffirm our support for the Declaration and Programme of Action on human rights, and welcome the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
 For its part, Uganda has established a human rights national focal point within the Justice Department aimed at enhancing public awareness and developing national capacity in the observance and promotion of human rights in the country.
 My delegation wishes to pay special tribute to all countries that have extended support to Uganda in this vital area of our development, and we appeal for continued support.
 Uganda is committed to democracy, good governance and the rule of law.
 The Constituent Assembly was successfully elected on 28 March 1994.
 The Assembly is currently debating a draft constitution, which is expected to be finalized and promulgated by the end of 1994.
 That will be followed by nationwide presidential and legislative elections in early 1995.
 Uganda is concerned about the current trends in the global economy which continue to weigh unfavourably on many developing countries, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa.
 Many of our countries are spending large proportions of meagre export earnings on debt-servicing alone.
 For instance, as of 30 June 1994 Uganda had a total external public sector debt of $2.99 billion over 80 per cent of estimated gross domestic product for the 1993-1994 financial year.
 Contractual debt-servicing was $185 million almost 76 per cent of export earnings; while arrears to be cleared were $222 million or 91 per cent of export earnings.
 The situation is compounded by the fact that 77 per cent of the total stock of debt, which is the portion owed to multilateral and bilateral institutions, is currently ineligible for restructuring or reduction.
 The problem of external indebtedness is further aggravated by unfavourable terms of trade, especially the collapse of our export commodity prices, severely contracted resource inflows and limited access to technology.
 For economic reforms to succeed in our countries, all creditors, including multilateral institutions, should adopt enhanced measures that go beyond debt-rescheduling in order to bring about a substantial reduction in our total stock of debt.
 Such measures should include substantial debt cancellation or conversion into grants and/or other innovative schemes such as the use of reserves, a new issue of special drawing rights and debt swaps.
 In this regard Uganda endorses the conclusion of the recent Jakarta Non-Aligned Movement Ministerial Meeting on Debt and Development: Sharing of Experiences and also endorses the recent proposal by the British Chancellor of the Exchequer on measures to resolve the debt problem of the poorest countries.
 Equally, there is a need significantly to increase resource in-flows to our countries for example, through increased levels of official development assistance; foreign direct investment in areas such as manufacturing, agricultural processing and tourism; and the provision of remunerative commodity prices.
 Uganda, in the context of the preparatory process and next year's mid-term global review of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries, will also seek the adoption of similar measures in favour of the least developed countries.
 Further, the way should be eased for more developing countries to gain increased access to international markets for their products, in order to augment their export earnings.
 We also urge that the necessary assistance be provided to enhance our capacity to produce value-added goods and services for international markets.
 My delegation supports this initiative.
 As we elaborate on the Agenda, we should be guided by the overall objective of effecting a substantial, rapid improvement in the quality of life in developing countries, through the eradication of poverty and the provision of basic needs, namely, nutrition, shelter, health and education.
 The international economic system dictates that we enlarge our economic horizons beyond national boundaries in order to widen our markets.
 Uganda welcomes the coming into force, of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Abuja Treaty establishing the African Economic Community, which provides a useful framework for coordination of African development efforts at the continental level.
 In order to succeed, efforts to be pursued at subregional levels should be well coordinated and rationalized.
 We appeal to the international community to provide requisite assistance to support our regional integration efforts in order to strengthen or create infrastructures that facilitate the movement of goods and services.
 However, it is necessary that the Rio political momentum be translated into practical measures to implement all commitments agreed upon, especially with regard to the provision of financial resources and the transfer of technology to developing countries.
 For its part, Uganda is committed to addressing all causes and effects of environmental degradation, particularly poverty.
 For instance, we are sparing no efforts in seeking ways and means to exploit our enormous potential in hydroelectric power and solar energy, which are environmentally sound and are economic alternatives to wood fuels.
 We appeal to the international community to support our efforts in the area of sustainable development.
 The most important outcome of the Cairo Conference on population was the endorsement of the view that the problem of population is not just a question of numbers; rather, the critical issue is that of human development and welfare.
 In this regard, the challenge is to improve people's standard of living in such areas as the provision of education and health, housing, transportation, clean water and sanitation, and to eradicate poverty.
 As a follow-up to the 1990 Programme of Action on children, Uganda has established the National Council for Children to oversee national activities aimed at their protection, promotion and development.
 We support the convening of the Copenhagen World Summit for Social Development in March 1995 to address issues of poverty- eradication, productive employment and social integration, which we hope will lead to the improvement of standards of living, especially in the most impoverished countries.
 We also support the convening of the Beijing Fourth World Conference on Women in 1995 to devise measures for the enhancement of gender equality and the empowerment of women.
 Uganda will continue to participate actively in the preparatory processes of both meetings.
 The reform of the Security Council, in our view, should aim at achieving greater transparency in its methods of work, making it more democratic in decision-making and reflective of the increased United Nations membership in its composition.
 We therefore support the proposal to expand its membership.
 Our legacy to future generations is to put in place a firm institutional framework that can adequately and equitably respond to the interests and concerns of all mankind, rich and poor alike.
 Mr. Gyaw (Myanmar): The delegation of Myanmar would like to congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session and to assure you of our fullest cooperation in the discharge of your responsibilities.
 We are confident that the wealth of experience and wisdom that you bring with you will prove invaluable in guiding us successfully through the present session.
 The election of President Nelson Mandela by the country's first multiracial Parliament has given birth to a united, democratic and non-racial South Africa.
 Its presence here reflects the momentous changes taking place in the world today.
 The concerted effort to abolish apartheid in South Africa has finally succeeded.
 We welcome our brothers from South Africa, wish them every success in rebuilding their nation and look forward to working closely with their Government and people.
 Myanmar, together with the People's Republic of China and India, enunciated those principles nearly five decades ago.
 These time-tested principles have crystallized as the universally accepted legal norms of inter-State relations.
 In strict observance of these principles, Myanmar has never allowed, and will never allow, its territory to be used as a springboard for action or threats against another State.
 By the same token, Myanmar expects that other nations will likewise abide by these principles in their conduct of policy towards Myanmar.
 At this time of dramatic and profound changes, the United Nations represents the best hope for mankind in the maintenance of international peace and security and in the promotion of international cooperation in other areas of human endeavour.
 Whatever character and shape the emerging new international order may eventually assume, we have no doubt that the United Nations will constitute a vital element in that new order and will continue to play an increasingly important role in international relations.
 In order to mark this auspicious anniversary in a fitting manner, we have formed a high-level National Committee in my country to carry out necessary preparatory work and to coordinate commemorative activities at the national level.
 Myanmar firmly believes that the United Nations plays a pivotal role in promoting international cooperation for development and for the maintenance of peace and security.
 My delegation shares the view that at the present time the search for security and peace in the world lies in development, not in armaments.
 For most people throughout the world, and particularly in developing countries, any feeling of insecurity arises more out of anxieties about daily subsistence than out of the dread of a cataclysmic global conflict.
 Underdevelopment creates poverty, hunger, malnutrition, environmental degradation and so on, collectively leading to civil strife, ethnic conflicts and, eventually, the collapse of peace and security.
 These problems may in some instances be confined within national borders; however, some will definitely have international and even global ramifications and consequences.
 Myanmar shares the view that economic and social developments are prerequisites for lasting peace and security.
 Fifty years ago, against a political background that was very different from today's, the United Nations was born with the purposes of maintaining international peace and security, promoting development and safeguarding human rights.
 Peace-keeping operations have a mixed record of successes and some set-backs.
 Experience and lessons from past operations should be carefully reviewed and re-evaluated to ensure the more effective and proper conduct of such operations.
 It is imperative that United Nations peace-keeping operations be carried out only with the consent and willing cooperation of the parties concerned and that all aspects of such operations strictly conform to the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter.
 There is also a need for such operations to be rationalized, streamlined and made more cost effective.
 Intensive negotiations are now under way in the Geneva-based Conference on Disarmament to achieve a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty.
 This opportunity should be seized by bringing the negotiations on the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty to a successful conclusion in the most expeditious way.
 We believe that such a moratorium, if also observed by other nuclear-weapon States, would create conditions conducive to the ongoing process of negotiating a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty.
 A careful evaluation of the progress achieved in these crucial areas should be made before taking a decision at the review Conference on the further extension of the Treaty.
 Myanmar looks forward to working and cooperating with other delegations for the successful outcome of the 1995 review and extension Conference.
 While I am on the subject of the NPT, may I take this opportunity to inform the Assembly that, as a State Party to the Treaty, the Myanmar Government has decided to sign the International Atomic Energy Agency Safeguards Agreement and Protocol.
 The signing of the Agreement and Protocol will take place in the near future.
 Myanmar is also actively taking part in the preparatory process for the implementation of the chemical weapons Convention since becoming an original signatory to it.
 Like other signatories to the Convention, the ratification process is currently under way in Myanmar.
 The signature on 4 May 1994 of the agreement to implement the Israel-Palestine Declaration of Principles marks an important milestone towards a lasting peace in the Middle East.
 We congratulate the parties concerned for their courage and mutual accommodation.
 We are also heartened to note that both Israel and Jordan are implementing the Washington Declaration signed by both parties in July.
 After years of recession and stagnation the world economy has resumed a modest growth.
 However, the recovery remains fragile and uneven, and it is in the interests of both developing and developed countries to strive for accelerated growth and sustainable development.
 While a number of developing countries have acted as the main engines of world economic growth, most of them are beset by a deteriorating economic and social situation.
 Developed countries are also facing slow growth and high unemployment.
 In this era of growing globalization and interdependence, concerted efforts by the world community are urgently needed to resolve the acute economic and social problems.
 We welcome the Secretary-General's report, An Agenda for Development, as most timely and appropriate.
 The report has highlighted economic growth as a crucial dimension of development and has singled out a supportive and favourable international economic environment for sustained growth.
 We fully share the view that the advancement of developing countries is being hindered by such obstacles as external-debt problems, declining external resource flows, sharply deteriorating terms of trade and mounting barriers to market access.
 We hope that the programme of action on the implementation of the agenda will be agreed upon at this session.
 Our aspirations for a new world economic order which is equitable and non-discriminatory have not yet been realized.
 The major challenges of these decades acceleration of development, alleviation of poverty, narrowing the widening gap among countries need to be addressed on an urgent basis.
 We fully support the call by the Group of 77, the Non-Aligned Movement and the Assembly for the resumption of the stalled North-South dialogue.
 A constructive dialogue based on common interests and mutual benefits should enhance international economic cooperation for development.
 We also welcome the successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round, although our aspirations were not fully realized.
 We had hoped for an open, equitable and transparent multilateral trading system which would benefit all countries.
 We are most concerned with new forms of protectionism, particularly the attempts to impose social and environmental conditions that discriminate against exports from developing countries.
 We are heartened by the Communiqu issued following the Naples Summit of the Group of Seven, which states that the Seven will continue efforts to enhance development assistance, trade and investment in developing countries.
 It states also that the Seven favour a reduction in the stock of debt and an increase in concessionality for those countries facing special difficulties.
 My delegation notes with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on the status and role of cooperatives in the light of new economic and social trends and welcomes the recommendations contained therein.
 Today, cooperative societies constitute significant components of the economies of developed and developing countries alike and play a crucial role in their economic development.
 In my country, we attach great importance to the cooperative sector as one of the main pillars of our economy and as an effective means of accelerating socio-economic development.
 The Earth Summit held in Rio two years ago firmly placed environmental issues on the global agenda, and since then hardly any international meeting has taken place without calls for common action to save our planet.
 No longer is the natural world perceived as a vast and inexhaustible frontier to be explored and exploited.
 An increasing number of countries now recognize that environmental issues warrant as much attention and effort as issues such as disarmament, narcotics and human rights.
 A regional meeting to prepare for the 1995 report on the state of the environment was held in Yangon in July this year.
 This meeting provided senior Government officials with an opportunity to discuss, in an integrated manner, issues related to the assessment of the state of the environment at the national and regional levels.
 The region of Asia and the Pacific comprises a large number of nations differing in size, resource endowment and stage of economic development.
 In many of our countries the eradication of poverty and greater equity in income distribution remain major challenges.
 Poverty and environmental degradation are closely related.
 Therefore, the alleviation of poverty is no longer simply a moral issue; it is a practical imperative.
 At the same time, achieving sustainable development will require that all countries, particularly the developed countries, change their consumption patterns.
 In the past we have tended to focus more on remedial measures than on the causes of environmental degradation.
 But if we are to overcome the challenges that we face we must deal with the underlying causes.
 With a view to remedying the situation, the Government launched in 1989 a programme for the development of border areas and national races.
 This integrated approach is expected to generate higher incomes and productivity by providing employment opportunities and increased welfare.
 However, the situation is being improved rapidly.
 There is extensive building of roads, bridges, schools, hospitals and reservoirs.
 This integrated rural-area-development programme will not only have positive effects on the socio-economic environment but also drastically reduce the area under shifting cultivation.
 The result will be conservation and the regeneration of forest resources in the fragile mountain ecosystem.
 The sustainable management and conservation of forests has long occupied a place of pride in Myanmar's environmental efforts.
 Sustainable production from forest resources and the conservation of biodiversity are assured by a forest working plan and a time-tested selective felling system.
 Myanmar attaches high importance to population issues and recognizes the close link between population and sustainable development.
 Our population-policy focus is on voluntary birth-spacing to promote the health of mother and child.
 The appointment of such an important personage by consensus testifies to the fact that both the developed and the developing countries attach importance to the promotion and protection of human rights, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
 As is confirmed by the Bangkok Declaration, the principles of national sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in internal affairs should be respected by all nations, and attempts to use human rights to encroach on the essentially domestic jurisdiction of States should be avoided.
 In saying this we do not mean that human rights may be systematically violated behind the barrier of non-interference.
 We wish to see human rights promoted through cooperation and consensus-building, and not through the imposition of values that we do not share.
 We believe that, even as we seek universality of human rights, we must never minimize or forget diversity in historical, cultural and religious backgrounds.
 The right to sufficient food, clothing and shelter, the right to a decent quality of life and the right to live peacefully and in security are often neglected in the clamour for individual rights.
 At this delicate juncture in our history, when Myanmar is in the midst of transforming itself to a multi-party democracy with a market economy, the interests of its 45 million people as a whole must take precedence over the interests of any individual.
 Confrontation and incitement to unrest and instability have no place when the nation is in the process of reconciliation and reconsolidation.
 In fact, it is totally against them.
 We have cooperated fully with the United Nations in every field and, in this regard, with the Commission on Human Rights by providing information in connection with communications and queries concerning the situation in Myanmar.
 In deference to the United Nations and as a gesture of our goodwill and cooperation, we will receive him again this year.
 The Memorandum of Understanding between Myanmar and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) signed on 5 November 1993, setting out UNHCR's role in Myanmar's border development projects, is an illustration of our steady cooperation with the United Nations and its subsidiary bodies.
 In such cases, we always seek peaceful solutions based on mutual goodwill, respect and understanding.
 A case in point is the matter of transport and movement of people between Myanmar and Bangladesh across our common border.
 Although some quarters tried to exaggerate the situation by invoking potential regional destabilization, our two countries were able to resolve the situation in a spirit of mutual friendship and understanding resulting in the repatriation so far of nearly 70,000 returnees to their hearths and homes.
 At the initiative of the Secretary-General, Myanmar decided to establish a dialogue with the United Nations to exchange views on various issues of common concern.
 I should like briefly to apprise the Assembly of the developments leading to this decision.
 The Secretary-General, in his letter, made constructive remarks in regard to the measures taken by the Myanmar Government and showed keen interest in the developments in Myanmar, particularly the process of national reconciliation and steps taken in drafting a firm constitution through the National Convention.
 I am happy to apprise the Assembly through you, Sir, that I had two meetings earlier this month with Mr. Marrack Goulding, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs of the United Nations, and that the dialogue between the Myanmar Government and the United Nations is now well under way.
 The global spread of drug abuse has become a major international concern in recent years.
 The evil consequences of illicit drugs transcend borders and the threat of illicit drugs can be overcome only with effective international cooperation.
 We share the view that concerted action is needed at the national, subregional, regional and global levels.
 Myanmar has always treated anti-narcotics measures as a national responsibility.
 At the national level, the Government has adopted comprehensive plans for the effective implementation of drug-suppression measures.
 A new law against narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances was enacted in 1993, encompassing effective measures against the widening scope of the drug menace.
 This approach is being carried out as one of the main objectives of our master plan for the development of the border areas and national races.
 We have also been coordinating our national efforts with those of our neighbours to ensure a maximum impact in drug eradication in the region.
 The Myanmar Government has signed agreements with the People's Republic of China and the United Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP), as well as with Thailand and the UNDCP.
 Bilateral narcotics-suppression agreements have been signed with Laos and India, and we aim to work out a similar agreement with Bangladesh.
 In October 1993, in New York, Myanmar, the People's Republic of China, Laos, Thailand and the UNDCP signed a Memorandum of Understanding which would further harmonize collective activities aimed at reducing drug trafficking and production, eliminating poppy cultivation and reducing drug demand and consumption.
 There have been two ministerial conferences at the subregional level in which Myanmar has actively participated.
 Myanmar is a State party to the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and to the 1988 United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.
 Moreover, on 7 June this year Myanmar deposited the instrument of accession to the United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
 They may not be wearing blue helmets like the men and women from different lands serving as guardians of peace under the United Nations banner, but the cause for which hundreds of them have sacrificed life and limb is no less internationalist and no less worthy.
 Myanmar is a union of over 100 different national races residing there.
 Since regaining independence in 1948, Myanmar unfortunately has had to face internal strife started by various armed groups.
 Beginning in 1989, less than one year after it assumed responsibility, the Government made overtures to the armed groups to return to the legal fold.
 Since April 1992, the armed forces have suspended military offensives against the armed groups in the interest of national reconciliation.
 Over four decades of internal strife has not benefited anyone, but has only caused death and destruction and untold suffering for the people.
 No one appreciates peace more than a soldier.
 It is therefore most gratifying that a total of 12 groups having trust in the sincerity of the Government's offer have returned to the legal fold and are working together with the Government for the development of their regions.
 These groups are also being provided with the opportunity to participate in the national political process the National Convention to shape the country's future.
 With the Shan State Nationalities Peoples' Liberation Organization, which returned to the legal fold on 9 October 1994, the armed groups in the reconciliation process now number 13.
 They will be integrated in the same manner as previous groups that are participating in the National Convention.
 To the remaining groups that have yet to return to the legal fold, the Myanmar Government reiterates its call not to miss this golden opportunity but to join hands in building a peaceful, democratic and modern union.
 At this juncture, let me turn to another aspect of the Government's objectives: the drafting of a firm and enduring constitution.
 Towards this end, a National Convention has been meeting since the beginning of last year to draft a new constitution.
 Consensus has already been reached on the 15 chapter headings for the 104 fundamental principles of the State and for the chapters on State, State structure and Head of State.
 As for those who allege that the process is moving too slowly, let me ask: Is the world today not full of examples where too much haste has led to chaos and confusion, even to armed conflict and the disintegration of nations?
 However, a balance must be struck between the need to reach consensus among the nearly 700 delegates on very urgent and vital issues, such as the national races, and the desire for the process to be completed in timely fashion.
 Anyone following these deliberations closely will realize that they lucidly give the lie to the allegations that the deliberations in the National Convention were orchestrated by the Government.
 At the same time, I wish to indicate to certain observers that in our society reaching consensus is more important than debating who is right or wrong or who won the debate.
 What the Government has done, and is doing at the moment, is to ensure peace, stability, law and order while striving for the economic development of the entire nation so that the transition to democracy will be smooth and tranquil.
 Today the National Convention is in full session for further discussions on the fundamental principles to be enshrined in the new constitution.
 The very fact that the new State structure will be a union system is a manifestation of the consensus that has been reached by the Convention.
 The new Union of Myanmar that is envisaged by the National Convention will be a genuine multi-party, democratic State in order to bring the nation modernity, unity, stability, peace and harmony.
 The new constitution will have safeguards to guarantee non-disintegration of the Union, non-disintegration of national solidarity and perpetuation of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
 As in the case of other modern Constitutions, the three organs of government - the legislative, executive and judicial will be properly constituted and separated as much as possible and will be able to exert reciprocal control with checks and balances among themselves.
 Furthermore, there will be constitutional remedies, and the Supreme Court will have the power to issue writs.
 Citizens will be able to enjoy the rule of law, which is the fundamental legal safeguard necessary for a democratic State.
 Because of the separation of powers envisaged in the new constitution, the judiciary will be the ultimate guardian of fundamental rights.
 The entire Myanmar nation is currently engaged in our national endeavour to establish a truly democratic and modern society in accordance with the aspirations of our people.
 We the people of the Union of Myanmar are doing our utmost to advance the ongoing political and constitutional process and the current programme of national economic development in the interest of all our national brethren.
 We have a popular saying in Myanmar:
 We are therefore fully confident that, with continued dedication, determination and diligence in our national endeavour, we will surely be able to successfully establish a democratic society based on the universal values of justice, liberty and equality.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, His Excellency the Honourable Mr. Remmy Mushota.
 Mr. Mushota (Zambia): Let me join the representatives who have spoken before me in congratulating you, Sir, on your unanimous election as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 You bring to the presidency vast experience in the area of international relations as well as diplomatic skill and acumen, which puts you in good stead to steer the deliberations of the General Assembly to a successful conclusion.
 You can count on my delegation's unqualified support and cooperation.
 I also wish to express my delegation's sincere appreciation to your predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Samuel Insanally of Guyana, who presided over the work of the forty-eighth session with great distinction and rare personal attributes.
 Mr. Blandino Canto (Dominican Republic), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 Our distinguished Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has continued to provide outstanding leadership in the discharge of his duties.
 Zambia is particularly grateful to the Secretary-General for his untiring efforts in pursuit of world peace and security, development and international cooperation.
 The past year has been one of mixed blessings on the international scene, a year of notable achievements and failures.
 My delegation is really delighted to see in our midst the delegation of a democratic and non-racial South Africa, led by President Nelson Mandela.
 In order to consolidate the democracy achieved in South Africa and address the negative social and economic legacy of apartheid, substantial international assistance is imperative.
 In this regard, Zambia endorses the appeal made by President Nelson Mandela for international support to South Africa to enable the effective implementation of its reconstruction and development programme.
 A democratic, peaceful and prosperous South Africa will no doubt have a positive impact on southern Africa and the African continent as a whole.
 Indeed, South Africa's contribution as a member of the Southern African Development Community has already begun to be felt and appreciated.
 It has, together with Botswana and Zimbabwe, also played a highly commendable role in the peaceful resolution of the constitutional problem in Lesotho.
 We have every confidence, therefore, that South Africa will contribute positively to the work of the United Nations.
 Africa has had a few other bright spots.
 We are delighted with the peaceful resolution of the territorial dispute between Chad and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
 However, the situation remains volatile.
 There is therefore a need to sustain international engagement.
 We also thank the observers to these talks, namely the United States, the Russian Federation and Portugal.
 Sustained international assistance to Angola will be necessary in the post-agreement era and Zambia will continue to assist the people of Angola during this period.
 We commend the Mozambican Government and RENAMO for committing themselves to the United Nations peace initiative and to the Rome Agreement.
 In Malawi, we welcome the recent peaceful and democratic transition to a multiparty system of government.
 Why should Africa democratize? Africa should democratize because it is our firm belief that democratic systems of government promote good governance, transparency and accountability in the administration of public affairs, independence of the judiciary, and respect for human rights and the rule of law.
 These qualities lay a firm basis for peace and stability and are thus conducive to sustainable development.
 We would therefore urge all of our development partners to take account of all these positive developments in the formulation of their development policies towards Africa.
 They should also endeavour to explain to their taxpayers the significance of these democratic changes and their correlation to sustainable development.
 Indeed, Africa, in the long run, holds the promise of a positive and prosperous future.
 In the Middle East, we welcome the positive developments in Palestine following the agreements and declarations between the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and Israel, as well as between Jordan and Israel.
 It is our sincere hope that progress can also be achieved in the negotiations with the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon.
 International assistance is urgently required for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and other essential needs of the Palestinians.
 We commend the efforts deployed by the leadership of the PLO and of Israel, their tenacity and their determination to work for peace.
 We also commend the crucial catalytic roles played by the United States of America and the Russian Federation as co-sponsors of the talks.
 These conflict situations continue to defy durable solutions through dialogue, reconciliation and negotiation, in stark contrast with the exemplary cases I have just cited.
 Thus, in our region, the civil wars in Liberia, Rwanda, Somalia and the Sudan torment us all because of our aversion to fratricidal and ethnic violence and the serious humanitarian crises they have engendered.
 We regret the lack of progress towards disarmament, demobilization and general elections.
 We appeal to all the parties to commit themselves to the Cotonou and Akosombo Peace Agreements.
 As for Rwanda, we and the entire world community have been deeply shocked by the genocide and the most dehumanizing spectre of violence in that country, resulting in one of the worst humanitarian and refugee crises in the history of mankind.
 Zambia has expressed its strong condemnation of the genocide and mindless violence in Rwanda.
 We strongly feel that those responsible for the massacres must be brought to trial through an international tribunal.
 Conditions of peace, security, stability and confidence should be created in Rwanda in order to facilitate the repatriation of refugees from overburdened neighbouring countries.
 We hope that the new Government will commit itself to carrying out its declared intention to work for reconciliation, rehabilitation and reconstruction in Rwanda.
 The neighbouring asylum countries also need assistance.
 The role and efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) in creating conditions of stability and security in the country are crucial.
 We therefore deeply regret the delay in the deployment of UNAMIR troops to the level of 5,500 in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
 In this regard, African countries have been ready and willing to send sufficient troops.
 However, the major constraint has been inadequate logistical support.
 Furthermore, the Zambian Peace Corps, a non-governmental organization, has organized activities to raise funds to purchase medicines, food and other humanitarian requirements for the displaced people in Rwanda.
 We remain concerned by the continuing crisis in Somalia and by the lack of progress.
 We note, however, the genuine efforts being deployed to resolve the crisis.
 Notwithstanding the difficulties, we strongly believe that the continued presence of the United Nations in Somalia is critical.
 In Sudan, the continuing civil war and factional fighting in the south and the deteriorating human rights situation nationwide are a cause of serious concern to us in Zambia.
 We urge the parties to reach a negotiated settlement.
 We hope that our two friends the United States and Cuba will resolve their differences peacefully.
 In this regard, we are encouraged by the recent dialogue between the two countries.
 Zambia attaches great importance to the role of regional organizations in addressing conflict situations.
 In this respect we note with satisfaction the increasingly active role played by the Organization of African Unity (OAU), including at regional and subregional levels, to address the root causes of conflicts and to prevent, manage and resolve them.
 In particular, in June of last year the OAU established a mechanism for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in order for Africa to deal effectively with conflict situations on its own.
 Conflicts continue to sap Africa's energies, to waste its scarce resources and to retard its development.
 They must be eliminated in order to create an environment conducive to economic and social development.
 Zambia therefore appeals to the international community to contribute generously to the OAU Fund established to sustain the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution.
 International support is critical to the effective implementation of this important initiative.
 It is warranted by the fact that the United Nations, through the Security Council, exercises primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
 It is now evident that peace and development not only are interrelated but are indivisible.
 This has been brought into prominence by the comprehensive reports of the Secretary-General entitled "Agenda for Peace" and "Agenda for Development".
 Indeed, in a number of conflict situations poverty and deprivation have been the underlying causes.
 We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's preliminary report on the "Agenda for Development".
 My delegation fully supports the views of the Group of 77 on this subject, as reflected in its Ministerial Declaration of 30 September 1994.
 In particular, an Agenda for Development must be action-oriented and focus on the economic growth and development of the developing countries, especially the least developed amongst them.
 Africa is in economic crisis.
 It continues to face grave economic difficulties.
 Africa therefore needs a favourable international economic environment for the promotion of investment flows, increased official development assistance, technological transfer, improved trade opportunities and better terms of trade.
 Such a debt strategy should include debt cancellation.
 In this regard, we fully support the positions of the Group of 77 and the Non-Aligned Movement.
 Zambia welcomes the conclusion of the Uruguay Round and the Agreement to establish the World Trade Organization (WTO) with effect from January of next year.
 In view of the increasing economic disparity between the developed and the developing countries, the WTO will not start on a level playing field.
 Compensation should be provided to those developing countries that are facing difficulties, particularly the least developed.
 Let me now address Zambia's economic and political situation.
 On the economic front, we have followed, resolutely, a credible macro-economic reform programme whose main objective is to promote growth with stability based on an equitable allocation of resources.
 To cushion the poor from these adverse effects of economic adjustment, a social safety net has been created to assist those who lose their jobs or who are unable to meet their basic needs or obtain social services.
 It is going to be a long haul, but the Zambian Government is determined to rise above these challenges.
 I should be remiss if I did not express gratitude to all our development partners for the economic, financial and technical support rendered to our country.
 The support provided Zambia by our development partners will serve to underpin our structural adjustment programme, to which our Government remains committed.
 More importantly, such assistance will help to consolidate our democratization process, which we initiated in 1991 with the reintroduction of plural politics.
 In this regard, my delegation is pleased to assure the international community that Zambia's democratization process remains firmly on course.
 There is a strong connection between the plan of action adopted at the Cairo Conference on Population, the World Summit for Social Development, to be held in Copenhagen early next year, and the World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing, next September.
 The World Summit on Social Development will be an opportunity for the international community to renew its commitment and political will to effectively address a number of social and economic problems.
 The contribution made by women to development efforts is very clear, although it is often underestimated.
 We therefore look forward to Beijing's programme of action, which we trust will ensure the full and equal participation of women at all levels of human activity.
 With regard to the environment, the international community is faced with the major challenge of giving practical effect to the concept of sustainable development as reflected in Agenda 21.
 To do this, effective international cooperation is vital.
 In particular, practical steps must be taken to provide access to appropriate technologies and to mobilize new and additional financial resources for the countries in need: the developing countries.
 My delegation therefore calls on the developed countries to fulfil the solemn commitments undertaken at the Rio Earth Summit.
 At the same time, the task at hand is global and must thus be shared globally.
 We have taken deliberate measures to increase the level of public awareness of environmental issues, particularly through the active involvement of non-governmental organizations and community groups.
 We believe that it is the duty and responsibility of all Governments to do so, regardless of their political, economic or cultural systems.
 Accordingly, my delegation will support genuine efforts in this direction during the current session.
 Mr. Lasso has already proven his suitability for the appointment, and we commend his important initiatives concerning human rights situations in Africa and elsewhere.
 My Government has also established a Human Rights Commission, which is responsible for investigating alleged human rights violations in Zambia, including those committed prior to the reintroduction of plural politics in 1991.
 In the spirit of our policy of transparency, the Government will publish the Commission's findings in a report to be made available to the general public.
 Zambia is thus firmly committed to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to other relevant international covenants and instruments.
 In the area of disarmament and arms control, my delegation strongly supports efforts to accelerate the elimination of nuclear weapons and to conclude a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
 We also fully support the review and extension of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which is scheduled to take place next year.
 However, we share the view that any extension of the NPT should be linked to progress on nuclear disarmament and to the conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
 Zambia welcomes the significant progress achieved in the Geneva negotiations on a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
 It will have to be a new United Nations, one which will suit the exigencies of the twenty-first century.
 It will be necessary to sharpen the mechanisms that were established to give effect to the declared principles and purposes of the Charter.
 It is only by going through this metamorphosis that our Organization will be able to adapt to a changed and changing environment, to new demands, new opportunities and new challenges.
 It will, therefore, be incumbent upon those regions to agree on which country or countries should represent them as permanent members.
 The Economic and Social Council should therefore be attuned to meeting this challenge.
 We would like to see a stronger Economic and Social Council with a mandate adequate to coordinate the policies of all development programmes and activities, as well as the activities of the specialized agencies, including the Bretton Woods institutions, for the promotion of sustained economic growth and development.
 We now live in a world in which there has been a major recasting of international relations ranging from political to economic, environmental to humanitarian issues.
 In this new atmosphere, the United Nations is the linchpin of our collective security, the repository of our hope for progress and prosperity.
 We wish this great creation more success for the betterment of the entire world.
 Mr. Maraj (Trinidad and Tobago): I should like to offer congratulations and special greetings to Ambassador Essy on his unanimous election to the presidency of the General Assembly.
 I am confident that under his able leadership this session of the General Assembly is well placed to address successfully the important issues on its agenda.
 Allow me to express appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Samuel Insanally for his wise and effective guidance during the session just concluded.
 He has indeed made an outstanding contribution, of which our region is very proud.
 We express our thanks to the Secretary-General for his stewardship of the Organization during these trying times, and we renew our pledge to give him our fullest support.
 Trinidad and Tobago, like the rest of the world, is in the process of making fundamental changes in the way we manage our affairs.
 Greater emphasis is being placed on the market paradigm as the means to unleash the inner energies of our society and to create the wealth needed for the improvement of the lives of all our citizens.
 In other words, whilst many things may be changing, there is one constant in Trinidad and Tobago, and that is our preservation of a humane and just society where all have the opportunity for fulfilment.
 Side by side with the globalization process, or maybe as a byproduct of it, is a resurgence of regionalism throughout the world.
 In our own hemisphere this is very pronounced, and the dream of a free trade area from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego seems more realizable than ever before.
 We are pleased to see various subregional groupings emerge and then develop relationships with one another.
 Never before in the history of our hemisphere has the integration process been so advanced.
 We have the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR), the Andean Pact, the Central American Integration Movement, the Latin American Economic System (SELA), the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Rio Group, in addition of course to the Organization of American States.
 It is significant that the cooperation which is flowering is not only economic but also political; this augurs very well for the development as well as for the security of the hemisphere.
 In addition to this multilateral coalescence, there is a general strengthening of bilateral relationships.
 We in CARICOM have been making strides towards overcoming historical barriers and have been deepening our ties with Latin America.
 My own country, having this year established diplomatic relations with six countries of Latin America, now has diplomatic relations with all the countries of the western hemisphere.
 Also, we joined 38 others, including both independent countries and non-independent Territories, in establishing the Association of Caribbean States, comprising countries of the Caribbean littoral and bringing into being a market of over 200 million people with a combined gross domestic product of $500 billion.
 I refer of course to Haiti.
 At present in Haiti, sanctioned by Security Council resolution 940 (1994), is a multinational force comprised mainly of troops from the region, with military contributions from elsewhere.
 My Government welcomes the cooperation extended by countries outside the region whose farsightedness persuaded them to contribute to the restoration process now taking place in Haiti.
 In the changed circumstances of today's world, there is more than ever a need to cooperate for security purposes and for the preservation of democracy, and this of course requires the political will which has been demonstrated by our region in the Haitian situation.
 We are pleased to participate in the collective efforts to ensure stability and the return of democracy and the democratically elected President to that country.
 We believe that the Caribbean has a special responsibility in relation to Haiti.
 We have therefore been in the forefront of attempts to solve the crisis, and we vow to remain with the problem until it is no more with us.
 We in the Caribbean are doing our part towards the goal of Cuba's reintegration.
 We have established the Cuba-Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Mixed Commission, and recently Cuba joined us as a founding member of the Association of Caribbean States.
 The peaceful transition to democracy in South Africa a few months ago stands out as a beacon of hope and signals that no problem is insurmountable if there is concerted national and international action.
 Trinidad and Tobago joins with the international community in assuring South Africa of its continued support in this crucial post-apartheid period.
 The Government of South Africa has announced its decision to include among its priorities the continuation of traditional friendships and the promotion of new partnerships.
 We look forward to the development of strong bilateral relations between South Africa and ourselves, a process that is already under way.
 We welcome the initiation of self-governing arrangements in the Gaza Strip and Jericho - important developments in this transition period - and look forward to the extension of Palestinian self-governing arrangements to encompass other occupied territories in the implementation of the Declaration of Principles.
 The international community's support for development efforts in the economic and social fields and the rebuilding of infrastructure destroyed during the long years of occupation is critical to the Palestinian people at this time.
 We are encouraged by the Washington Declaration of 25 July 1994, issued by the Governments of Jordan and Israel, which ended the state of war and paves the way for normalization of relations and a formal peace treaty.
 Whilst there is cause for satisfaction globally, we continue to be traumatized by other events which have already shattered the lives of millions of people, evoking images more horrendous than those we have witnessed before.
 We were first appalled and are now numbed by the horror in Rwanda, where hundreds of thousands of lives have been lost, creating hellish human suffering in that country.
 Destruction, oppression and suffering continue in various parts of the world, affecting hundreds of thousands of lives in Somalia and elsewhere.
 Nuclear proliferation makes us all very uneasy, creating pictures of an abyss of unspeakable chaos into which we can very easily slip.
 It has become a clich of international helplessness to say that the world community must act decisively and expeditiously to do this or that to deal with many of the problems that I have mentioned.
 To effect lasting solutions to the crises that are upon us we must go back always to the fundamentals and remember, for example, that development and peace are inextricably linked.
 If we are to get anywhere near to solving some of our problems we must deal with key issues such as good governance, the promotion of peace, the promotion of justice as a pillar of society, sustainable environmental management and social development.
 International conferences of world leaders, some held and others to come, all point the way to a new partnership for development based on global consensus and action.
 In this regard, the World Summit for Social Development will be convened in March 1995 in Denmark to address some of the serious ills afflicting many societies by focusing on the key problems of poverty, unemployment and social marginalization.
 The programme of action to be adopted at the social Summit must therefore include specific provisions, including adequate financial resources for implementation and follow-up by the international community and, more specifically, by the United Nations and its agencies and institutions.
 In this era of increasing globalization, no Government, particularly Governments in the developing world, can hope, on its own, to address effectively these varied problems.
 We therefore welcome the approval by the International Law Commission earlier this year of a draft statute for an international criminal court and we support the convening of a diplomatic conference to conclude a convention on the establishment of a permanent court.
 Another important area being tackled by the international community is the full participation of women in the process of development.
 The fact is, effective international cooperation for development will remain elusive, in the absence of specific measures for an adequate means of empowering all members of society to participate fully in the political, economic and social life of their respective societies.
 It is widely acknowledged that investment in women can have an enormous impact on the advancement of society as a whole.
 However, women from all parts of the globe continue to face systematic discrimination in all fields of endeavour, while also bearing a disproportionate burden of the consequences of economic recession, poverty, structural adjustment policies and political strife.
 In acknowledging this, Trinidad and Tobago has put in place constitutional guarantees to ensure equal treatment for all under the law, irrespective of gender, creed or race.
 My Government holds steadfastly to the position that women must be allowed equal opportunity to participate fully in all spheres of life and at all levels of society, particularly in decision-making positions.
 Trinidad and Tobago is encouraged by efforts made during the ongoing preparatory process for the Fourth World Conference on Women to address these and other crucial issues.
 Much work remains to be done in the ensuing months.
 It is recognized that population-related goals and policies must be integral parts of cultural, economic and social development aimed at improving the quality of life.
 Consequently, the International Conference on Population and Development, which was convened in Cairo last September, quite appropriately reviewed the impact of demographic factors on development and emphasized the importance of the entire spectrum of population policies to the development process.
 We must now take concrete steps to uphold the principles and implement the Programme of Action adopted by the Conference.
 The crucial area of the environment is also being discussed.
 Member States have taken initial steps at the national and international levels, towards the elaboration of a new development paradigm based on the integration of environmental concerns in development activities.
 The continuation of this process would lead to the implementation of the policies and decisions adopted at Rio de Janeiro, thereby making possible the attainment of the targets identified for our common good.
 For many island developing States which have remained on the periphery of international programmes for development, the implementation of the agreements adopted in Barbados will create the opportunity to participate as contributors and beneficiaries in a truly global effort.
 The preservation and sustainable management of the resources in all global commons must be an important goal of the Agenda for Development.
 But this goal must be facilitated by the development of legal regimes to ensure that we successfully carry out our duties as trustees of those resources.
 In this context, Trinidad and Tobago welcomes the imminent entry into force of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, having participated very actively with other Member States in forging a new, more universally accepted public order for the oceans.
 Trinidad and Tobago will continue to participate constructively and in close cooperation with other Member States in the decision-making process of the Authority as well as in other institutions related to the 1982 Convention.
 This objective can be attained only if there is a confluence of political will to act decisively.
 Political will is also absolutely necessary if we are to address adequately the various international economic impediments to effective national efforts to promote social progress and better standards of life.
 The major obstacles include trade barriers, insufficient flows of international financing, onerous external debt and the inadequate transfer of technology to developing countries.
 They serve to frustrate the ardent efforts made by Governments to revitalize their economies.
 Trinidad and Tobago welcomes the important step taken earlier this year towards free and open trade, with the successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations.
 We emphasize, however, that as we seek to implement the trade liberalization measures under the agreements arrived at, urgent attention must be given to the persistent trend of economic growth accompanied by increased poverty, unemployment and marginalization of large sections of populations the world over.
 It is clear from what I have said that it is only through a multilateral approach that we will solve the problems of the world.
 Clearly, the most appropriate vehicle to accommodate this approach is the United Nations.
 People are turning increasingly to the United Nations not only for the realization of their aspirations for peace and security, but also in their quest for development with equity and social justice.
 To this end we intend to participate actively in current efforts to restructure the United Nations to enable it to become more responsive to the needs of Member States in this dynamic international environment.
 As the United Nations is on the threshold of celebrating its fiftieth anniversary, Trinidad and Tobago is pleased to recommit itself to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter.
 Mr. Chygir (Belarus) (interpretation from Russian): Let me congratulate Mr. Amara Essy on his unanimous election as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Almost half a century ago, the founding Member States and my country is one of them set for the United Nations a task of paramount importance: to unite our strength to maintain international peace and security and to promote the economic and social development of all nations.
 It was necessary to create a mechanism for coordinating states' efforts that could offer mutually acceptable solutions to international problems.
 Thanks to the great efforts of this prestigious international Organization, we have managed to avoid military flare-ups and conflicts in many parts of the world.
 Unsettled bilateral relations between some States, including those relating to the areas of human rights and protection of national minorities, are also factors.
 Under these circumstances, the role of the United Nations as a universally recognized uniter of peoples becomes much more significant.
 I am deeply convinced that there will come a time when the collective reason of the United Nations will have a much greater impact on the processes taking place in the world.
 For four years now Belarus has been building a democratic, independent and sovereign State.
 Our ideal is one of a free citizen in a free country.
 After decades of totalitarianism and sham collectivism, we are gradually giving back to our people freedom, which the great humanist Leonardo da Vinci called the main gift of nature.
 One significant milestone in the life of Belarus was the adoption of a new Constitution and a historic first for us truly free and democratic presidential elections.
 Presidential power and the trust of the people guarantee that democratic reforms in our country will be irreversible.
 In foreign policy, the Republic of Belarus believes in the principles of sovereign equality of states, non-use of force or the threat of force, inviolability of borders, peaceful settlement of disputes, non-interference in internal affairs and other universally recognized norms of international law.
 Our Constitution contains a provision that Belarus should be a neutral State and its territory a nuclear-free zone.
 Our Republic is ready to cooperate with the whole world and is seeking its rightful place in Europe in the regional structures of collective security and economic cooperation.
 We have embarked on this path firmly and irreversibly.
 The legal and organizational bases for moving to the socially oriented market economy have now been created in the Republic.
 The ideas of having a state of law, dividing power into different branches and improving the system of executive authority are now being put into practice.
 However, as in other countries of Central and Eastern Europe, transition to a market economy is very difficult.
 Our greatest difficulties occur in privatization, fighting monopolies and stabilizing the monetary-financial system.
 Moreover, we inherited from the past a national economic structure in which an excessively large share was given to the military-industrial complex.
 The adverse effect of the unprecedented radioactive contamination on people's health is not decreasing.
 Modest estimates put the overall damage from the drought at more than $300 million.
 Under these difficult circumstances, the Republic has elaborated a programme of measures for pulling the economy out of crisis.
 This programme will be the basis for an agreement with the International Monetary Fund, which we plan to sign sometime next month.
 Firmly resolved to carry out wide-scale reforms, we intend to curb inflation, reduce the budget deficit and reduce the deficit in the balance of payments.
 Full liberalization of trade and prices, speeding up privatization, should, we think, make it possible to lessen the crisis in our economy.
 Relying on our own forces, we nevertheless understand that without support from the outside we cannot carry out our reforms fully and in a reasonably short time.
 We are open to the concerns, anxieties and problems of the whole world, and we wish to make our own contribution to the activities of the world community of nations.
 Not just rhetorically, but in reality, Belarus was the first State in history voluntarily, without reservations or conditions, to renounce the possession of nuclear weapons.
 We support proposals on the indefinite and unconditional extension of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
 Recent steps taken by Belarus to withdraw nuclear weapons from its territory ahead of schedule make it possible to consider a substantial part of this region as nuclear-free territory already.
 Belarus supports the efforts by Members of the United Nations to speed up the negotiations on concluding a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty.
 We also support the proposal made here to elaborate a treaty on nuclear security and strategic stability.
 And, of course, we advocate multilateral discussion of issues relating to regulating the international arms market and military equipment.
 I would like to stress that, despite our economic crisis, our Republic is endeavouring to comply fully with our obligations to reduce nuclear and conventional weapons, even though this requires enormous additional expenditures.
 In this connection, we feel we can expect the international community to support our actions.
 The people of Belarus paid a great price in delivering of world from fascism.
 The deadly fires of war scorched our land and touched literally every family in it.
 The tragic price of freedom was the life of every fourth citizen in my country.
 Not until 25 years after the war did our population once again attain its pre-war level.
 The Belarus delegation also considers that next year would be the appropriate time to delete from the United Nations Charter the outdated concept of the enemy State.
 We must use the forthcoming United Nations golden jubilee to seek new ways of improving our performance in the changed world conditions.
 It is a truism that nature cannot tolerate rigidity and that everything in nature is constantly changing.
 Of course, no Security Council reform should detract from its role as the body responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security, so needed by all Member States, and particularly the smaller States.
 We believe that greater account should be taken of existing realities, including the complex problems confronting countries whose economies are in transition and the poorest countries, as well as of global problems of population, unemployment and environmental deterioration in all parts of the world.
 Political and economic dialogue between donor and recipient countries must be given new content, going beyond the traditional framework of relations between them.
 There is a growing need to broaden cooperation and strengthen coordination between the United Nations, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and other regional organizations and arrangements.
 We believe that peace-keeping operations should not be allowed to overshadow the crucial problems of socio-economic development.
 Administrative and financial reform must become the most important aspect of United Nations renewal.
 One way of achieving that would be through a more rational distribution of the financial burden between the United Nations and other international institutions, including regional organizations.
 The President (interpretation from French): I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Her Excellency Ms. Lena Hjelm-Wall.
 Ms. Hjelm-Wall (Sweden): May I at the outset express my sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on your election to the important post of President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 The shock still lingers in the hearts and minds of all people around the Baltic.
 I am certain that this tragic event will in the end bring the stricken peoples even closer together.
 Sweden's commitment to the United Nations and its principles and ideals is longstanding, firm and deep.
 To the new Swedish Government this commitment is crucial.
 It is perhaps the most important political document in the hands of humanity today.
 In the spirit of the Charter, world leaders should mobilize a global civic spirit of solidarity to extend the scope of and respect for international law and to strengthen global governance.
 The United Nations gives us an international system of law to avoid anarchy and the rule of the strongest.
 The United Nations enables us to work together to thwart ruthless assertion of self-interest and spheres of influence.
 Sweden wants a United Nations which reacts effectively against atrocities and mitigates human suffering and through which we can tackle the major questions of global survival, together and in solidarity.
 Sweden wants a United Nations that not only is a forum for the interests of States but that places the well-being of the individual at the centre.
 Solidarity does not recognize borders.
 These expectations and hopes are threatened by war and violence, by the suppression of human rights, and by racism and xenophobia.
 Diplomatic breakthroughs in the Middle East offer hopes for a comprehensive and lasting peace.
 In South Africa, the apartheid has been dismantled.
 Yet we are confronted with new conflicts and dangers.
 We must all learn from tragic events such as those in Rwanda and Somalia.
 The inconceivable suffering in Rwanda points to the need for preventive diplomacy, early action and the coordination of United Nations efforts.
 While taking a forceful attitude to gain respect, the United Nations should avoid military enforcement other than as a very last resort and with a clear Security Council mandate.
 In Bosnia and Herzegovina and in other parts of the former Yugoslavia, efforts to end the conflict must be intensified and accepted by all parties.
 Only in peace can the tragic consequences of "ethnic cleansing" be reversed.
 Now is the time to work out plans for reconstruction and reconciliation.
 The Swedish Government is concerned about information on Iraqi military activity close to the border with Kuwait.
 We fully support the statement on the situation made by the Security Council three days ago.
 Let me mention a few areas where, in my view, reform is urgently needed.
 The United Nations must be able to operate more efficiently and according to modern principles of management, and new priorities have to be set.
 Countries in all regions must feel that they are partners in its actions.
 The Council has to maintain political control over the actions it authorizes.
 It must not become an instrument for dividing the world into spheres of interest, one in which the collective nature of United Nations action is not sufficiently safeguarded.
 Sweden has drawn experience from its participation in the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR).
 There must be a particular focus on early warning and early action in conflict resolution.
 Preventive diplomacy should be further strengthened.
 Thousands of lives can be saved and costly relief efforts avoided if action is taken in time.
 The new Swedish Government is ready to establish a United Nations peace-keeping brigade.
 We do this in response to the Secretary-General's proposal for stand-by forces set up by Member States, ready to be deployed in crisis areas without delay.
 The need for better and more uniform training of peace-keepers is urgent.
 Particular attention should be paid to improved coordination between the military aspects of peace-keeping and civilian and humanitarian efforts.
 With this in mind, Sweden is prepared to contribute to improved training of peace-keepers.
 Sweden would like to see closer interaction between humanitarian programmes and peace-keeping operations.
 When this lack of discipline affects the financing of peace-keeping operations, it puts an additional burden on the troop contributors.
 Fortunately, there is a growing and widening awareness among Member States of the role of human rights and democracy for the development of modern societies.
 Governments must show the will and commitment to fully implement human rights norms.
 The Convention on the Rights of the Child was a great achievement.
 It is indeed a great challenge to assure all children of care, protection, education and freedom from hunger and from physical or mental violence, as provided for in the Convention and reaffirmed at the World Summit for Children.
 Governments which have ratified the Convention must live up to their commitments to the children of the world.
 Solidarity is fundamental in our efforts to overcome global economic and social challenges, and, thus, fundamental to prospects for peace and solidarity.
 The United Nations has a unique and central role in this endeavour.
 Sweden's development cooperation will focus on support for the long-term, sustainable development of poor countries, with special emphasis on democracy, popular participation and the rights of women and children.
 We will also continue our efforts to strengthen the United Nations function as a forum for normative discussion and action and as a channel for development cooperation.
 We must use it to draw up a clear and strategic programme of action for the United Nations system in the development area.
 The International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo, the World Summit for Social Development to be held in Copenhagen, and the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing are all linked.
 Agenda 21, adopted at the Rio Conference, facilitates joint action to achieve sustainable development at both the local and the global level.
 All over Sweden local versions of Agenda 21 are now being actively pursued.
 Patterns of consumption and production must be sustainable.
 In this regard, the developed countries have a particular responsibility.
 Ecological balance must be established also while we combat poverty.
 Disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are central to the goals of preventing conflicts, promoting peace and fostering economic and social development.
 Agreements that were inconceivable only a few years ago have been concluded.
 Agreements must also be ratified and implemented if they are to contribute to peace and security.
 Furthermore, the present momentum should be used to strengthen and further develop well-established disarmament regimes.
 The need to establish a verification system for the Convention on biological weapons is a case in point.
 The non-proliferation Treaty is a key to both nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
 The Treaty is the only multilateral agreement in which nuclear-weapon States have committed themselves to nuclear disarmament.
 As long as nuclear weapons exist, we must insist that these commitments be honoured.
 Our common goal must be a world free of nuclear arms.
 On several occasions, Sweden has presented proposals for a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
 It is essential that these negotiations be concluded in the very near future.
 Sweden was one of the first countries to ratify the chemical weapons Convention.
 Sweden has proposed such a ban.
 Regional instruments for preventing and dealing with conflicts are being developed.
 This should not deprive the regions involved of support from the international community through the United Nations.
 The responsibility of the United Nations, including the Security Council, remains universal.
 The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) is a central and indispensable institution for conflict prevention and management.
 The endeavours of the CSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities have effectively contributed to building security in Europe, as have the CSCE missions in the field.
 The Swedish experience of cooperation between the CSCE and the United Nations tells us that global and regional efforts are not in contradiction but are mutually reinforcing.
 We look forward to cooperation in all areas with the new, democratic Russia.
 As a member of the Union, Sweden would whole-heartedly support the Union's efforts to promote security and economic and social development, not only in Europe but on a global scale.
 It is by looking outwards, by forging links and extending its cooperation to other regions, that the European Union makes its contribution to global stability and solidarity.
 Let me emphasize that there is no contradiction between European and global cooperation.
 Sweden will be an active member of the United Nations and defend openness and international cooperation.
 Sweden has presented its candidature for a seat on the Security Council for the period 1997 to 1998.
 The Swedish candidature is based on our commitment to global security, on our will to promote international law, and on our conviction that conflicts can and must be solved by addressing their root causes before they lead to war.
 The President (interpretation from French): I have great pleasure in welcoming the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Lesotho, His Excellency the Right Honourable Mr. Ntsu Mokhehle, and inviting him to address the General Assembly.
 Mr. Mokhehle (Lesotho): On behalf of the people and Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho, and on my own behalf, I have the pleasure to extend to you, Sir, our warmest congratulations on your well-deserved election to the presidency of the General Assembly at the forty-ninth session.
 Your election is a fitting tribute to the efforts that your country has made and continues to make in international relations, especially its mediatory role in conflict situations on our continent.
 Our special thanks also go to your predecessor, the Ambassador of the Republic of Guyana, His Excellency Mr. Samuel Insanally, whose abilities and clear vision in steering the Assembly during the forty-eighth session will forever be remembered with appreciation.
 We are also indebted to our distinguished Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, whose track record is without parallel.
 Even as we approach the threshold of the twenty-first century, our world is still mired in conflicts.
 Our Organization must strive to contain these and other situations, which are the legacy of the post-cold-war era.
 We are entering a new era, one in which democratic and inclusive global institutions can play a principal role in building a better world.
 As it approaches its fiftieth anniversary, the United Nations faces a number of challenges; it has to become a real instrument of international legality, peace and security.
 The Organization needs to have the means and the flexibility to play an increasingly active role in these unpredictable times.
 The United Nations system should be able, at all times, to respond rapidly to changes and new developments as they occur around the world.
 In the last few years we have witnessed significant events of historic moment.
 The events in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, recently, in Rwanda starkly demonstrate the sluggishness of the decision-making process and the lack of responsiveness on the part of the system.
 Disarmament, especially in the nuclear field, remains an urgent concern of this Organization.
 Its relationship to international peace and security is today more evident than ever before.
 Today, conditions exist for the establishment of a stable and peaceful global environment.
 It is under such conditions that the world can begin to enjoy what may be called the peace dividend, whereby global expenditures will be shifted away from preparations for war and unending concern for national security towards investment in development.
 Solid groundwork for cooperation and confidence-building has been successfully laid in a number of regions.
 The progress in this regard bodes well for the future.
 In our region, the continental organization, the Organization of African Unity (OAU), has established a mechanism for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts.
 The apparent inability of the world community to act in a timely and decisive manner during some tragic conflict situations in our continent has taught Africa the cardinal lesson that we cannot continue to delegate our responsibilities to the rest of the world.
 We have seen evidence of this a number of times, particularly during crisis situations in Rwanda and Somalia.
 Africa is taking up more seriously the challenge of fending for itself.
 We shall, however, continue to count on international solidarity and cooperation during the trial stages of the mechanism.
 We are happy with the progress achieved thus far in Mozambique.
 We urge the parties involved to show political will and to negotiate in good faith in order to ensure the early establishment of lasting peace, stability and development.
 Democracy is the cornerstone of every civil society and the preservation and sustaining of its institutions should be binding on all of us.
 If it is necessary to look backward to yesterday, it is only to draw lessons that will enable us to march confidently and resolutely into the future, a future in which our citizens will live in harmony and enjoy prosperity.
 Where these principles are threatened by those who are reluctant to come to terms with the realities of today, the international community has stood up resolutely in defence of our fledgling democracies.
 The events in Haiti and our recent experience in Lesotho demonstrate beyond the shadow of a doubt that young and fledgling democracies can be seriously threatened or turned off their course.
 The constitutional crisis we faced has since been resolved; however, I recall these events because of the important lesson they brought home to all of us who were directly concerned.
 Secondly, the international community can no longer countenance an open attack upon democratic principles and the institutions of democratic governance.
 It is through their mediatory efforts that we were able to emerge from the unfortunate constitutional crisis that we experienced.
 The people of Lesotho will always remember that when they faced a critical test, when the foundations of their young democracy were under attack and threatened with wanton destruction, the friends of democracy stood firm and remained resolute to the end.
 In almost every country experiencing some kind of civil strife, it will always be found that the first casualty of that strife is human rights.
 At the regional level, we all support the work of SADC, which has recently decided to establish a sector to deal with human rights questions.
 We pledge to work with our fellow SADC member States as we develop this new sector of our organization.
 We also pledge to fulfil our obligations at the international level through the various United Nations bodies engaged in human rights work.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, His Excellency Mr. Nathan Shamuyarira.
 Mr. Shamuyarira (Zimbabwe): My delegation congratulates you personally, Sir, as well as your country, Ce d'Ivoire, on your election as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Your election is testimony to the role you and your country have played in international relations.
 We are confident that the United Nations will benefit from the term of your presidency.
 Allow me also to congratulate your predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Samuel Insanally of Guyana, on his outstanding stewardship of the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session.
 His conduct of the many complex and vital issues before that session was indeed praiseworthy.
 Our tribute also goes to our Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his sterling leadership of our Organization during the past year, a year in which it has continued to face ever-increasing challenges.
 We are especially grateful to him for his continued efforts to further the objectives of the United Nations in Africa and elsewhere, and for his tireless drive to enhance the Organization's role in maintaining international peace and security and addressing development issues.
 Its readmission into the community of nations signifies victory in its long and difficult struggle for justice and equality.
 For the African continent, it marks the closing chapter in the total decolonization of the continent; and for the United Nations, it concludes an extraordinary collective struggle against the policy of apartheid.
 In this context, I must add that the recent decision by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency to redesignate South Africa as Africa's representative on the Agency's board was indeed appropriate and welcome.
 If the peace accord negotiated in Lusaka is not signed by the end of October, the Security Council should immediately impose economic sanctions on UNITA, as agreed in resolution 864 (1993).
 We cannot continue delaying and postponing action while waiting for a peace that does not come.
 However, if the peace accord is signed, the United Nations, for its part, should stand ready to deploy a greatly increased peace-keeping force to supervise the cease-fire.
 In Mozambique, despite delays in the implementation of the General Peace Agreement, we are hopeful that peace and stability will soon be realized.
 The forthcoming national elections, planned for 27 and 28 October, should produce results acceptable to all Mozambicans so that they can live in peace and harmony.
 We have just heard a statement by the Prime Minister of Lesotho himself, Mr. Mokhehle, describing to us the events that took place in his country.
 Mr. Blandino Canto (Dominican Republic), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 We are happy to report that this joint mediation has resulted in the restoration of constitutionality and constitutional Government in that country.
 Prime Minister Mokhehle has adequately described that situation, and I need add nothing more.
 In Rwanda, the horrendous acts of genocide we have witnessed will surely haunt every one of us for a long time to come, both those among us who had the means to act but did not do so and the many who, while desiring to help, lacked the means.
 We call for the strengthening of the United Nations presence under the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), as an essential confidence-building measure to provide the displaced people of Rwanda with tangible assurances that they can safely return to their homes.
 A few days ago we heard a statement by the President of Rwanda, Mr. Pasteur Bizimungu, inviting an increase in the size of UNAMIR in order to achieve precisely what we are asking for: confidence-building.
 In both Rwanda and Burundi, the tensions are still too close to the surface for anyone's comfort.
 In Somalia, the deterioration of the security situation and the resurgence of inter-clan fighting, banditry and lawlessness are still a source of great concern to my delegation.
 The people of Somalia should take full advantage of United Nations peace-keeping efforts and of the OAU mediation effort led by President Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia, and forge a political settlement based on sharing the power among the Somali nation as a whole.
 Zimbabwe has contributed two battalions to peace-keeping in Somalia.
 As we start gradually withdrawing those battalions, we hope they will not be called back to a Somalia where law and order have broken down again.
 The quest for self-determination in Western Sahara has taken too long, and has remained on our international agenda for a long time.
 It should therefore not be delayed any further.
 My delegation also welcomes the recent major developments in the Middle East peace process which have brought the people of Palestine closer to their inalienable right to self-determination.
 The people of Palestine still need and deserve our continued support until they reach the goal of nationhood in a Palestinian State with its capital in Jerusalem.
 There can be no economic development without peace and stability.
 Central to these fundamental concerns about peace and stability are the basic issues of protecting human rights and democratic governance.
 We believe that high priority must be given to these issues in our national policies.
 Consequently, dictatorial and non-democratic regimes should be shunned and isolated by all of us and by the international community at large, as well as by regional organizations.
 The curtailment of people's participation in decision-making processes undermines the capacity of countries to provide all their people with even the basic necessities of life including food, water and shelter and basic social services such as education and health.
 Zimbabwe believes that international efforts to promote peace, stability and security where these do not exist or are threatened can largely be facilitated through regional organizations and good neighbours.
 In our view, such arrangements could also be devised to address situations elsewhere in our continent, for example in Rwanda, Burundi and Somalia.
 What we are urging is the involvement of regional organizations, subregional organizations and neighbourly countries in conflict resolution and conflict management, because they know the problems and they know the issues.
 For such regional arrangements to become sustainable it is essential that other regional organizations and the United Nations extend a helping hand by providing financial and other material assistance.
 For indeed, what are initially regarded as internal or local conflicts have the potential, if left unattended, to grow into trouble spots threatening international peace and security itself.
 Clearly, the treaty itself is discriminatory and the nuclear-weapon States have not fully implemented their obligations under article VI of the Treaty.
 Several speakers today have referred to the inadequacies of the Treaty. We will not support any indefinite and unconditional extension of the NPT in its present form.
 The nuclear-weapon States must undertake to reduce and eliminate their nuclear arsenals within an established and binding timetable.
 As a demonstration of their good faith they must also stop impeding the early conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
 Regrettably, that draft resolution was not brought to the vote.
 We are, however, glad that the Non-Aligned Movement has this year decided to submit the draft resolution once more, and to press it to the vote in the Assembly.
 This initiative is deserving of the strongest support of all members.
 It would also be consistent with the Secretary-General's recommendation on resort to International Court of Justice advisory opinions in his report entitled "An Agenda for Peace" and would give impetus to the process of nuclear disarmament, which has begun to flag in the post-cold-war era.
 We all agree that there have been so many changes on the international scene that the present Charter and methods of operation of the United Nations should be revised to meet the challenges and aspirations of a new and changing world order.
 In this regard, my delegation has already put forward some very specific proposals, which I will not recapitulate in any detail here.
 Those proposals are now part of the African common position paper which refers to the powers of the Security Council, the General Assembly and the relationship of those bodies to the Bretton Woods institutions and to the specialized agencies.
 This subject has been referred to by a number of speakers from this rostrum; indeed, the speakers from Africa have repeated the African common position.
 It is quite clear that the present arrangement, where Africa and the Latin American region are not represented at all amongst the veto-wielding permanent members of the Security Council, should not be allowed to continue.
 The underrepresentation of these two regions is both undemocratic and unfair, and I hope that the matter will be addressed at the appropriate time in terms of the African common position.
 Furthermore, any exercise in the revitalization of the United Nations should envisage coordination of the activities of the Bretton Woods institutions to which I have already referred.
 We are pleased that world-wide socio-economic problems of equitable utilization and distribution of resources are going to be fully addressed at the Far Social Development World Summit in Copenhagen next year.
 Several important conferences have recently been held within the framework of the United Nations: the Rio Conference on Environment and Development and the International Conference on Population and Development held in Cairo in Cairo.
 These conferences all address matters that are vital to the South and/or to the third-world countries as a whole, and we hope that the social development Summit will focus on growing poverty in the world and how to attack it.
 The rapid development of science and technology is taking place in the middle of increasing poverty and disease amongst large population groups, especially in the third world.
 It is time we took enormous steps to eradicate world poverty and to create full employment.
 We hope that the combined efforts of the environment and population Conferences, to which I have already referred, and the social development Summit and the Beijing Conference will mobilize the international community for a final and sustained attack on world poverty.
 Zimbabwe believes that at the national level it is imperative that development put people first by promoting social development through employment-creation opportunities and other poverty- eradication programmes.
 In our view, the provision of adequate food, water and shelter as well as such basic social services as education, training and health is an absolute imperative.
 In the promotion of opportunities for increased popular participation, the enhancement of the role and status of women requires paramount attention.
 Employment creation requires greater private initiative and increased investment.
 Thus domestic policies have to be pursued with the aim of creating a favourable environment for investment.
 The critical economic situation in Africa - the least developed and most marginalized of all the regions of the world - has to be addressed if global economic growth and interdependence are to have any meaning at all.
 With 90 per cent of all poverty stricken people in developing countries, the eradication of poverty remains a major concern at both the national and the international levels.
 Figures available clearly indicate that the overall debt of the developing countries is still on the increase - from some $800 billion in 1982 to $l.4 trillion in 1992 - and it continues to rise.
 Combined with the interest rates, the figures are constantly growing, indeed becoming staggering.
 We believe that new, comprehensive and coordinated approaches to the debt and debt- servicing problems have to be adopted, including outright cancellation or at least the application of the measures proposed under the Trinidad terms for low-income developing countries.
 Zimbabwe believes that the expansion of international trade is essential to economic growth and is indeed an integral part of development.
 We therefore consider the conclusion of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations to be an important achievement which deserves to be welcomed by developing and developed countries alike.
 We welcome the meetings that have been arranged both in Africa and elsewhere to study the impact of the Uruguay Round agreement and the World Trade Organization on our economies.
 We reiterate the hope that these developments will improve the access of developing countries' exports to markets in developed countries, and that the new conditionalities or new forms of protectionism under the guise of social or environmental clauses will be avoided.
 Finally we would urge the big Powers - and especially the United States - to adopt a policy of dialogue rather than confrontation in resolving disputes with smaller Powers around the globe.
 A concerted effort by regional organizations and the international community can get us to the promised land of international peace.
 We should try and try again, but the attainment of peace is not the task of international organizations alone: it is also the task of national Governments and national leaders.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I now call on Mr. Carlos Morales Troncoso, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
 My Government's policy towards the pressing need for development is exemplified by the urgent efforts it is making on behalf of its people in the changing context of today's world.
 Thus it was that the General Assembly became the stage par excellence for the airing and debate of the most urgent world-wide problems.
 While its political effectiveness may not have met all the requirements of peace because of the structure of world power that had prevailed since 1945, it did achieve overwhelming success in the actions and programmes of its specialized agencies.
 Born to foster peace and security and to promote development, the United Nations was the fruit of the post-Second-World-War era.
 At that time peace meant the absence of war and of the justifiable fear of world-wide self-destruction.
 Unique and monumentaL events symbolized by the razing of the "wall of infamy" have created the propitious conditions and opportunities for recapturing and relaunching the lofty goals of the signers of the San Francisco Charter.
 Those events summon us to struggle for a world built on solidarity, respect for the self-determination of peoples, and the quest for a better standard of living for all.
 Our efforts must thus be aimed at combating poverty and achieving social justice.
 We must foster new democratic ways for the exercise of power and genuine respect for human rights.
 In other words, we must ensure that democracy works, prospers and prevails.
 Unquestionably, the present-day world is beset by economic and political complexities incompatible with the aspirations of people everywhere to a decent life.
 Globalization of the economy, intense financial competition, national cultural diversity, and the various tensions between groups, countries and regions, typified by the ethnic and religious regional conflicts of recent years, constitute the features of the new reality.
 They lie in the will to build a consensus and in the ability to promote development through fair competition regulated by rules that are accepted by all participants.
 Unless world peace is at stake, the threat or use of force is no longer a viable instrument for achieving the decent life to which all peoples are entitled.
 How, then, can we defend democracy and ensure that, rather than perish, it becomes stronger and more effective in dealing with starvation, unemployment, drug trafficking, the depletion of natural resources, forced migration and the new forms of trade protectionism that undermine development?
 If, indeed, we are to protect human rights and strengthen democracy, we must undertake a thorough review of this whole issue and of the very concept of development on the basis of equitable access to markets, capital and new technologies.
 The Dominican Republic is one of the most solid and deeply rooted democracies on the American continent.
 It is one of the few Latin American democracies in modern times with a record of lasting and commendable political stability.
 It is an example of harmonious and civilized coexistence in a society marked by contrasts.
 We have shown to the world that our democracy is participatory, with reconciliation and dialogue as the channels for the solution of the major political and economic crises that we have experienced.
 We must therefore make progress in harmonizing financial, technological and production policies in order to achieve growth at all levels.
 The development of the most industrialized nations may be inadequate without the growth of developing nations.
 We are witnessing a transition towards trade liberalization that can lead to freer trade and the eradication of poverty through the creation of more and better jobs.
 One of them is neoprotectionism.
 In this way the aspirations to free trade may become mere rhetoric.
 Impoverishment is another threat.
 Are we fully aware that opening up our economies can cause us to overlook the need to properly administer their attendant social costs?
 Unemployment and the acceleration of social investment plans threaten to negate the efforts we have made over many years to democratize our political systems.
 As members know, more emphasis is placed on selling than on producing.
 However, we do not have adequate means of production or fair access to them; yet we are supposed to compete on an equal basis with the more industrialized countries of the world.
 These are not invalid complaints and claims.
 New rules must be worked out to permit developing countries to gain access to technology and finance their infrastructures on favourable terms - in other words, to attain practical and acceptable levels of competitiveness.
 How can we meet these new challenges? To begin with, any development policy must attempt to modernize our sources of production.
 If we have little or nothing to sell, what is the point of continuing to open up our markets? This is closely linked to the development of a proper transport and communication infrastructure and to the optimum use of energy sources.
 We must thus create new conditions of productivity, particularly in the fields of technology social development.
 If human beings are to be the focus of all development policy, the fostering of effective programmes becomes the best possible business.
 All these initiatives and actions to meet the new challenges that stem from the globalization of the economy must be viewed in that context.
 We should be able to achieve a new idea of cooperation.
 Cooperation is the alternative to intervention, the way to fulfil the international community's desires for peace, stability and democracy.
 In this new age, we must be keenly aware of the trends that are shaping the end of this century and the beginning of the next.
 The world is becoming smaller, more interdependent and globalized; the survival of human life is gravely threatened by the deterioration of the environment and by short-sighted, uncoordinated policies to stem the tide of problems besetting the planet.
 We in the Dominican Republic, have our share of problems, but one stands out: we live geographically next door to the poorest nation of the hemisphere.
 Haiti has written glorious pages in the history of the struggle for freedom and equality.
 Its past, heavy with confrontation and long periods of authoritarian rule, has unfortunately turned it into a nation requiring international assistance.
 The problem of drug trafficking and narcotics consumption continues to be a scourge of world-wide dimensions.
 It is the Dominican Republic's State policy to deal most severely, in keeping with our legal provisions, with the trafficking, consumption and possession of narcotic drugs.
 What is more, our country has offered, and will continue to offer, its cooperation to other nations in the apprehension, prosecution or extradition of those who have made this criminal trade the most lucrative activity of our new times.
 Although the developed countries are the most attractive market for the sale of narcotic drugs, the underdeveloped countries, whether or not they are producers of narcotic drugs, have seen an increase in drug addiction too.
 The entire international community must continue resolutely to deal with this scourge so that drug abuse does not become the side effect of a seductively excessive well-being or the amnesia-inducing product that helps some to cope with poverty.
 The Dominican Republic, a nation of pacifist traditions, will continue to support the efforts of the United Nations in preventing armed conflicts and in the establishment, maintenance and consolidation of international peace and the internal peace of all nations.
 INSTRAW was conceived at the first World Conference of the International Women's Year, held in Mexico City, and was created pursuant to the decision of the Economic and Social Council.
 The Dominican Republic takes this occasion to reiterate its request that INSTRAW and UNIFEM not be merged.
 We also request retention of the commitments entered into under Economic and Social Council resolution 1998/LX, of 12 May 1976, which establishes the permanent headquarters of INSTRAW in the Dominican Republic, so that our great city in the Americas may continue to host that important organ.
 We are deluding ourselves if we think that peace, security and development can be pursued as separate goals at either the national level or the international level.
 The new era demands that confrontation turn into dialogue and that calls for justice be replaced by shared commitments of peoples.
 Mr. Sonko (Gambia): My delegation welcomes the election of Ambassador Amara Essy as President of the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly with a genuine feeling of great pride and satisfaction; he is not only our neighbour in the West African subregion, but a seasoned diplomat.
 He is certainly no stranger here, having served his great country, Ce d'Ivoire, as Permanent Representative at the United Nations for many years.
 We in the Gambia hold him in high esteem for his constructive and positive contributions to problems of common concern, both at the bilateral and multilateral levels.
 I have no doubt that those qualities, for which he is well known, will contribute immensely to the successful conclusion of our deliberations.
 I should therefore like to congratulate him warmly on his assumption of office and to assure him of the full support of my delegation in carrying out his important mandate.
 Let me also take this opportunity to pay tribute to Ambassador Insanally for the excellent manner in which he performed his duties during his tenure of office last year.
 In the same vein, I wish to commend the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his untiring efforts and effective leadership in ensuring the realization of the ideals for which our Organization, the United Nations, was founded.
 The advent of a non-racial, democratic Government in South Africa symbolized a significant turning point in the constitutional and colonial history of South Africa, in particular, and of Africa in general.
 The resilience and resourcefulness that have guided and inspired the people of South Africa in the crucial years of their march to a non-racial and democratic Government will, I have no doubt, serve as important assets in South Africa's effective participation in the work of the United Nations.
 This change was caused by a series of events and developments within the country that the previous Government had neglected and in some cases had refused to address.
 The continued abuse and misuse of political power and of public office, coupled with serious corrupt practices at various levels of Government departments, necessitated this action.
 The Gambia has since independence in 1965 enjoyed a relatively long period as a democratic State and as a politically stable country.
 We acknowledge this achievement, but at the same time we also have good reasons why the Government in power had to be removed.
 When that stability comes under increasing strain, however, and is threatened from within by certain important officials of Government and politicians alike, the preservation of that stability and national integrity becomes more important than anything else.
 There is no political system that is perfect.
 The privilege of being the people's representatives does not confer any rights that entitle those representatives to do anything other than the people's business.
 The restoration of public trust and confidence in government in the older democracies is an institutionalized process that has acquired value and stability.
 The mechanisms that protect the State and allow for a peaceful and acceptable mode of restoration of public trust and confidence have been tested and proved effective over time.
 That action is reinforced by the fact that the strength of democratic societies lies with the people, who freely participate in the political process and select or elect their representatives.
 We wish to emphasize that the events that took place in the Gambia in July this year must be understood as politically necessary to allow for corrective measures to be put in place and to usher in a new and equitable democratic political system.
 In this connection, the present provisional Government's overriding objective is to set up those institutions that would provide the necessary checks and balances and thus enhance the democratic process in the Gambia and the right of the people to elect a government of their choice.
 The essence of a democratic political system is, in addition to its inclusive character, its ability to promote the political, economic, civil, social and cultural rights of the individual and of the community as a whole.
 Any democratically elected Government that only promotes the civil and political rights of its people and neglects the promotion of their social, cultural and economic rights, or that deliberately fails to provide equal opportunities for all its people, forfeits, in our view, its right to govern.
 The challenge that faces democratic Governments - and any Government, for that matter - is how to promote that cluster of human rights without giving any undue attention to a few of them.
 The Gambia subscribes fully to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and other human-rights instruments.
 We shall continue to respect our obligations under these international covenants.
 We affirm our commitment to returning the country to civilian rule after addressing these inherent weaknesses.
 A programme of transition and rectification will shortly be announced.
 In pursuit of these objectives, we are mindful of the need for objectivity and impartiality.
 In this connection, the new regime has already approached a number of friendly countries in our subregion that have the same legal heritage as the Gambia and asked them to assist by providing judges with the requisite expertise in similar exercises.
 As part of this process, an independent electoral commission will also be put in place for the same purpose - to strengthen democracy.
 The military take-over was not, therefore, directed against any country; its purpose was to redress certain internal difficulties.
 It goes without saying that while we are engaged in this national exercise we shall also honour all our international obligations, in addition to playing an active role in the comity of nations.
 The situation in Liberia has always been of major concern to us, and the failure to implement the Cotonou Accord fully has not dampened our enthusiasm.
 The Akosombo Agreement constitutes another attempt, in a long and tortuous peace process, to galvanize the principal players in the Liberian conflict in an effort to achieve a genuine peace leading to free and fair elections.
 The Gambia has followed with keen interest recent positive political and military developments in Rwanda leading to the cessation of hostilities and the establishment of a Government of national reconciliation, which we hope will be consolidated further.
 The assistance of the international community will continue to be needed in Rwanda, not only to restore peace and stability and law and order but also to ensure the smooth, safe and speedy return of all Rwandese refugees and displaced persons to their respective homes.
 The current inability of the international community to broker a durable peace and reconciliation between the parties to the conflict should not deter us; rather, it should spur us to redouble our efforts and our resolve to find a satisfactory solution to the conflict.
 But peace is priceless and constitutes one of the principles underlying the creation of this noble Organization, and this is certainly not the time for the United Nations to consider withdrawing the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNISOM).
 On the question of Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is saddening to note that, so far, all the efforts deployed by the international community to find a negotiated settlement have been persistently frustrated by the Bosnian Serbs without the slightest compunction.
 Furthermore, the Bosnian Serbs have persisted with their heinous policy of "ethnic cleansing" and other war crimes, in total disregard of the basic norms of international behaviour.
 I believe that by lifting the arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina the international community would be sending strong and clear signals to the intransigent Bosnian Serbs.
 With regard to the dispute over Jammu and Kashmir, my delegation upholds the view that the Simla Agreement and the relevant Security Council resolutions provide a sound basis for a just and lasting solution to the conflict.
 In respect of the Arab-Israeli conflict, we are encouraged by the events that have been unfolding since the signing of the Peace Accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
 The balance sheet has been generally positive, and we encourage both sides to pursue the peace process.
 Such a positive development will give added credibility to the entire Middle East peace process to secure a comprehensive and durable solution in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
 Another important and worrying factor, which threatens to undermine any political gains in our countries, is the question of poverty and the lack of economic development.
 Extensive external debt and debt-servicing obligations continue to be important constraints on the advancement of the developing countries.
 The situation is most acute in Africa.
 This is equivalent to $199 billion, while debt-servicing arrears total some $45.8 billion, which is equivalent to over 20 per cent of the total debt stock.
 For sub-Saharan Africa, therefore, the ratios of debt to gross national product and debt to export are almost three times the registered average for all developing countries, making it the most impoverished region in the world.
 There is more than ever before an urgent need for the international community to find a lasting solution to this problem.
 Against the background of such difficulties, it is regrettable to note that, in real terms, aid flows to Africa as a whole have also been on the decline in spite of the substantial increase by a few countries in their levels of aid to Africa.
 Equally noteworthy is the failure of direct foreign investments to increase appreciatively enough to relieve Africa's financial crisis and stimulate economic growth.
 Let me, en passant, recall that the Tokyo International Conference on African Development served as a forum to raise international public awareness and renew commitment to Africa's development.
 The successful implementation of the Tokyo Declaration will depend largely on the common political will of African Governments and their development partners.
 From a global perspective, it is predicted that the conclusion of the Uruguay Round will link economies more strongly through an increased flow of trade and finance based on trade liberalization and a strengthening of the multilateral trading system.
 While the liberalization of trade as a result of the Uruguay Round may lead to a substantial increase in world trade and income, the impact on developing countries could be less noticeable.
 On a different but more positive note, it is gratifying to note that the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for the elaboration of an international convention to combat desertification in those countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertification, particularly in Africa, has completed its mandate and that a Convention has been adopted.
 The three regional implementation Annexes have also been concluded.
 The cumulative effects of drought and desertification on our environment as well as on the socio-economic development of our countries have been amply demonstrated.
 But if this Convention is to make a difference, it must be provided with the necessary resources to ensure its effective implementation.
 The correlation between drought and desertification and rapid population growth is well known.
 That is why we welcomed the International Conference on Population and Development that has just ended in Cairo.
 It demonstrated the importance of population policy as an essential ingredient of social and economic development.
 We fully support the Programme of Action adopted by the Conference and will continue to work closely with international, regional and national agencies, including non-governmental organizations, to implement it, taking into account our national priority strategies on population policy.
 Similarly, the Yokohama Strategy and Plan of Action which issued from the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction constitute a clear reflection of our collective determination to develop and strengthen our existing capacity for natural disaster prevention, reduction, preparedness and mitigation.
 We very much welcome the World Summit for Social Development to be held in Copenhagen in March 1995.
 While the Conference will address three core issues - enhancing social integration; alleviating and reducing poverty; and expanding productive employment - it will none the less attract a number of social and developmental issues of relevance to world social progress and global development.
 For those of us in the developing world, the Conference will afford the opportunity to address once more our socio-economic development needs while drawing attention to existing social ills in our societies and finding solutions to these problems.
 Indeed, the twenty-first century holds many challenges for mankind, but the most important and pressing will be the elimination of gender discrimination.
 In order to fulfil this purpose efficiently, the ongoing consultations for restructuring and revitalizing the United Nations system, notably that of the General Assembly, should be vigorously pursued.
 My delegation will continue to lend its unwavering support to these laudable efforts.
 Urgent attention should also be given to strengthening cooperation and coordination between agencies of the United Nations system, the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions.
 Gambia will continue to give full support to the international effort to address the social, economic and environmental problems facing mankind.
 The joy we share with other nations as Members of the United Nations is matched only by our respect for each Member of this commonwealth of nations.
 I also take this opportunity to convey to Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our Secretary-General, our high esteem and fraternal gratitude for his tireless efforts to reduce pockets of tension and strengthen international peace and security.
 His devotion and talent reinforce the role of our Organization.
 Despite the emergence of certain conflicts, the world is on the threshold of a new, more promising era in which dialogue and joint action seem to be prevailing over confrontation.
 Even if the goal of a peaceful world society has not yet been reached, it is acknowledged that our Organization has contributed broadly to decolonization and the progressive development of international law.
 Thanks to the United Nations, some global problems, such as those of population and environment, have become priority concerns for all nations, small or large, rich or poor.
 All Africa places its hopes in South Africa, whose leaders have demonstrated wisdom and determination.
 We earnestly hope South Africa will be able to pass peacefully and harmoniously through its new stage of transition.
 One of this year's felicitous events is clearly the concretization of the peace process that started with the Washington agreements between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
 Their mutual recognition has provided fresh impetus, and it heralds an era of peace in that part of the world, which has for so long been bloodied by war.
 I take this opportunity to congratulate President Arafat and the Palestinian people on their tireless efforts to give Palestine a sovereign, independent State within internationally recognized boundaries.
 The Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros, an Arabic-speaking and French-speaking African State, will spare no effort in sincerely encouraging all the parties concerned to strive for peace.
 We therefore welcome the agreement reached between the Kingdom of Jordan and Israel.
 My country has always respected our Organization's principles, and therefore has always advocated dialogue and concertation in the settlement of conflicts.
 In that spirit, it endorsed the General Assembly's recommendations on the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte.
 While we take note of the tangible results of the rebirth of democracy in Eastern Europe, the opening up of Africa to multiparty politics and the easing of tensions between Powers, we cannot be but concerned at the appearance of conflicts that are undermining world stability and equilibrium.
 The case of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a constant and striking reminder that we still have a long, long way to go on the road to lasting peace.
 Nothing would be more tragic than allowing passion and pride to prevail over reason and take precedence over the lives of thousands of women, children and old people, who are the daily victims of this incomprehensible conflict.
 We still wonder how all the macabre events that have torn Rwanda apart could have taken place.
 I take this opportunity to express our deepest gratitude to France for "Operation Turquoise," as well as to all the States that supported that operation, for without it Rwanda would have ceased to exist.
 We express our gratitude to the neighboring States for the very African hospitality they showed in saving the lives of human beings in distress.
 In addition, we salute the courage and determination of the political authorities and the people of Burundi for their avoidance of another tragedy with incalculable consequences.
 It is imperative that we finally wake up to Africa's economic realities and understand that its instability and destitution are a standing threat to society throughout the world.
 While we recognize that the world political situation has eased considerably, we must also take note that the international economic situation shows us no glimmer of hope.
 Political stability will be fragile if there is not a clear improvement in the economic sphere and, in particular, if growth is limited to the wealthy countries.
 The developing countries are bearing the full brunt of the ill effects of the crisis, in the form of deteriorating terms of trade, rising protectionism, decreasing net flows of external resources and, on top of all that, the debt burden, which nullifies the efforts of the developing countries.
 In this context, it is our collective responsibility to combat poverty, famine and destitution in the developing countries.
 Given the distress of the developing countries and an international economic system in crisis, we must devise a new and constructive vision, one capable of restructuring the world economy while reflecting the interests of both parties within the framework of sincere cooperation.
 We place our hopes in a renewed United Nations that will take concrete action to establish more balanced international economic relations.
 The Federal Islamic Republic of the Comoros also believes that cooperation between the countries of the South is imperative; indeed, we have made cooperation with the developing countries an essential element in our relations.
 It is in this spirit that our regional institutions have adopted a strategy aimed, first and foremost, at strengthening trade and industrial cooperation, and at improving transportation, telecommunications and so forth.
 Thus it has signed a programme of structural adjustment with the international financial institutions, with the aim of achieving economic recovery and of improving public finance.
 It is a trial that the Comorian people is enduring with courage and sacrifice.
 But the recent devaluation of the Comorian franc has exacerbated the crisis by seriously undermining the Comorians' purchasing power.
 While it is true that the easing of international political tension and of certain regional conflicts has reinforced hopes for peace, the gravity of the international economic situation is also creating doubt.
 The victims of the world crisis are still the same: men, women and children of the African, Asian, Latin American and Caribbean regions.
 Indeed, the same people are always the ones who are confronted with famine, poverty, natural catastrophes and desertification.
 The harsh reality of the poor countries is accentuated by their exclusion from the decision-making process concerning the international economic situation.
 As the twentieth century draws to a close, the long-cherished hopes of the third-world peoples are giving way to disappointment.
 Specialists in development assistance and economic cooperation are unanimous in finding that the current trend is towards stagnation and even regression.
 Our General Assembly must now find a solution to the problem created by the failure of international economic relations.
 We must insist more strongly on our sense of solidarity and shared responsibility.
 We are among those who believe that the victors of the Second World War do not have a monopoly on the maintenance of peace and on the socio-economic development of nations.
 I should like to request that the Security Council reconsider the sanctions adopted against Libya, because, as a result of sanctions condemning inadmissible acts, an entire people is being penalized.
 May the peace-keeping operation there bring stability and security so that Haitians, in their renewed unity, can work together to rebuild a free and prosperous nation.
 We also extend these wishes to our brothers in Liberia, Somalia and Angola, so that, as in Mozambique, they may resume dialogue and lay down their weapons.
 Indeed, our Organization will never accept a repetition of Iraq's aggression of 1990.
 It is difficult for us to believe that Iraq has not learned the lessons of that famous, much-covered Gulf war, from which the Iraqi people, the ultimate victims, are still healing their wounds.
 If it does not, mankind will not be able to understand why each time peace seems to be established another war looms.
 May I conclude by repeating my delegation's fraternal congratulations to the President of the General Assembly on his election.
 Mr. Muller (Marshall Islands): Allow me at the outset to congratulate the President of the General Assembly on his unanimous election.
 It is indeed a great honour for his country.
 I can assure him of my delegation's willingness to assist him in his duties.
 His innovative use of expert hearings on the question of development were followed closely by the Marshall Islands delegation.
 My compliments are also extended to our distinguished Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, whom we thank for his tireless efforts on behalf of this Organization.
 On a more sombre note, I wish to extend the condolences of my Government, delegation and people to our neighbours in the Pacific, Papua New Guinea and Japan, which have both recently experienced devastating volcanic eruptions.
 Further grim descriptions and graphic pictures of the terrible loss of life on the high seas in the sinking of the "Estonia" have been occupying the air waves and television screen.
 We should like to express our deepest sympathy and condolences to the affected families and Governments over this tragic accident.
 We now wish to join other delegations in welcoming South Africa to this Organization.
 The struggle of its people with racial inequality resulting from apartheid was long and difficult, often resulting in the loss of precious lives.
 We share their excitement in finally joining the concert of nations.
 The Organization itself has become involved in several ambitious undertakings in innovative international relations and multilateral actions.
 We hope that these new endeavours of partnership will produce lasting solutions to many of our global problems.
 That very partnership is evident by the work being undertaken on the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which is viewed with great interest in the Marshall Islands.
 Currently, we are working together with the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), of which we are a founding member, in introducing a new protocol to the Convention.
 The German Government's support for the AOSIS protocol is most gratifying.
 We hope that the Conference of the Parties will adopt the proposed protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change on Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction next year in Berlin.
 We view this Agreement as a positive step in bringing order to the exploitation of marine resources.
 In this vein I am happy to announce that we will sign that Agreement at this session.
 In the months leading up to the Barbados Conference last April, we were very confident that at last the international community would try to do something positive for the small island developing States, a group of countries that we feel has been neglected.
 Fortunately, the Conference, in Cairo, after arduous and intensive negotiations, saw fit to adopt an expanded international population strategy, as a result of which we now have a well-thought-out Plan of Action.
 We will, however, make every effort to maximize our participation in this Plan of Action.
 We all owe a great deal to its distinguished Chairman for his masterful stewardship.
 For the Marshall Islands, this Conference is particularly important as we seek to build our capacity to utilize our marine resources responsibly.
 Unlike distant-water fishing nations, our geographical location compels us to ensure the sustainable exploitation of our fisheries resources for future generations, whether within or outside our exclusive economic zone.
 This is a matter of survival, one that transcends economics.
 I submit, however, that large-scale commercial fisheries are a new concept for our people.
 We must familiarize ourselves with them.
 In this regard, the active assistance of the developed countries is needed to train our people in the modern techniques of commercial fishing.
 In this context, it is essential that we gain preferential access to international markets.
 We have brought this matter up many times, and we urge the Assembly to promote trade as well as training.
 While we are not asking for much, we do hope that assistance for self-help will continue to be forthcoming.
 Thus, together with other Forum countries, we will aspire to develop a strategy that will prepare the way for the World Summit for Social Development.
 We recognize that further improvement of our relationships with the various United Nations agencies in our region is essential.
 Of equal importance is the World Conference on Women in Beijing next year.
 As a matrilineal society, we have long recognized the wisdom of including women in our decision-making process, and we look forward to participating in the Beijing Conference.
 During the World Hearings on Development earlier this year, many of the expert witnesses spoke of the high proportion of United Nations expenditures earmarked for peace-keeping, much to the detriment of overall development efforts.
 The Marshall Islands will actively participate in this matter in the Fifth Committee, and we hope to work together with others for a more equitable apportionment of expenses and assessed contributions.
 We shall be very vigilant in the discussions following on the Vienna Declaration on this matter.
 We believe there is no statute of limitations to human rights abuses, as clearly they are crimes against humanity.
 The prevalent lack of common decency, which the President of Bosnia and Herzegovina so painfully described in his recent address, must be eradicated.
 My delegation fully supports this concept, particularly since the fate of many Pacific Island people during the Second World War remains an unwritten chapter in the history books.
 We trust that moral restitution will be made to the memory of these victims.
 The consequences of recent geo-political events have amply demonstrated the need for the expansion of the Security Council.
 With 184 Members, the United Nations must ensure that the Security Council reflects the realities of the changed situation.
 My delegation supports the proposal for increased membership.
 In this context, it is appalling to note that the Security Council, whose decisions affect all Members, does not involve more States in its decision-making process.
 As a positive remedial solution, the suggestion by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand in this regard is of great significance and should be considered.
 Members will no doubt recall that it was during the relatively brief period of the United Nations-approved trusteeship that 67 atomic bombs were detonated on islands that had been inhabited peacefully and productively by the people of the Marshall Islands for centuries.
 This must be regarded as a matter of more than historical interest, in view of the resulting legacy of horrific environmental degradation and tragic human suffering - a legacy that threatens to haunt the Marshallese people for centuries to come.
 Documents recently declassified and released confirm that the full extent of the radioactive contamination resulting from these tests was not disclosed to the Marshall Islands by the United States during the negotiation of the Compact of Free Association.
 Accordingly, neither the compensation provided nor the remedial measures undertaken or contemplated for the clean-up of some of the contaminated islands and the treatment of the affected human population can now be regarded as adequate.
 My Government lacks the huge sums required to ensure the proper clean-up and disposal of the radioactive contaminants and the treatment of the radiation-induced illnesses and birth defects caused by the nuclear-weapons tests.
 What, then, is my Government to do? We may hope for the unreserved cooperation of the former administering Power in fully cleaning up and disposing of its nuclear waste and in adequately aiding our afflicted people.
 In short, we must do more than simply hope.
 It is with this unhappy dilemma in mind that we ask the General Assembly to consider sympathetically our efforts to attend to the restoration of our lands and the treatment of our people.
 The effective disposal of those contaminants will require their permanent isolation from the human biosphere.
 My Government wishes it to be understood that such a facility would also serve the global interest in securing the safe and permanent disposal of a portion of the world's dangerous nuclear materials, an interest that, at present, is by no means accommodated anywhere in the world.
 Consequently, my Government has resolved to conduct a preliminary feasibility study for such a facility and to consult closely with interested members of the international community as we proceed.
 We look forward with interest to such a conference, and we pledge our support.
 My Government recognizes that the establishment of a nuclear materials disposal facility in the Marshall Islands may upon detailed analysis be found to be unfeasible or otherwise unacceptable.
 We expect that this Organization, which placed our islands under trusteeship in the first place, will ensure that justice prevails.
 At this time, my Government requests the sympathetic support of the General Assembly as we continue with the effort to secure a commitment to adequate treatment and full compensation of all the victims of the nuclear-weapons-testing programme.
 My Government attaches the utmost importance and immediate urgency to this matter.
 The issues I have mentioned are of high priority.
 Those of us who already know your work at the United Nations and at other international meetings can already foresee the success of the work of the forty-ninth session; we know your enormous talent, wisdom and patience.
 Your election also reflects the international community's confidence in your country, Ce d'Ivoire, a country with which Niger maintains diversified relations solidly rooted in the history and geography of West Africa.
 Finally, your election is a posthumous tribute by the international community to the work carried out over half a century by the late President F\x{5e68}ix Houphou\x{892e}-Boigny in the service of human dignity, peace and social progress.
 Permit me, therefore, to congratulate you, Sir, and through you the people of Ce d'Ivoire and its President, Mr. Henri Konan Bedi, on your election as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 I wish also to congratulate the other Assembly officers; I am sure they will spare no effort to rendering valuable assistance as you carry out your tasks.
 I also convey my greetings to the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and thank him for the dynamism and far-sightedness with which he is carrying out his mandate in this period of important change; we hail him for his firm commitment to international peace and security.
 The annual convening of the General Assembly gives Niger the opportunity to renew its faith in the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, signed at San Francisco nearly half a century ago.
 Niger is firmly committed to this path of democracy; it has already found the path of freedom for its children.
 Today in Niger, no one is molested because of his philosophical or religious ideas; since the establishment of the Third Republic, freedom of the press is complete and is guaranteed by the Constitution.
 Freedom of association too is complete and guaranteed by the Constitution, and a number of political parties, associations and trade unions now play to the full the role that is properly theirs in every democratic society.
 It is in that context that the people of Niger is engaged in rediscovering the path of the love of work, which alone can generate wealth.
 Many non-governmental organizations have been founded and are working in close cooperation with foreign organizations.
 Niger is a Sahelian country confronted with the inexorable advance of the Sahara Desert; we welcome the conclusion at Paris last June of the International Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa.
 We hope that the international community will finally be able to act on its commitment to give countries suffering from this scourge the ability to lay the foundation for genuine, sustainable development.
 Sometimes too meager, sometimes excessive, the rainy season is an ongoing concern in Niger.
 They caused considerable damage but did not gratify our people or our Government with an adequate harvest.
 That is why our Head of State, His Excellency Mr. Mahamane Ousmane, has initiated a major campaign in which the people are participating in building the first-ever dam on the Niger river................................................................................................................
 For Niger, this is a question of ensuring the conditions necessary for the survival of the present and future generations.
 My country has accorded food self-sufficiency top priority in its campaign for economic development.
 It keenly hopes that with the assistance of the international community it will achieve this objective before the end of the present decade.
 Here, Niger hopes that the nations which share the same ideal of prosperity and happiness will extend it the same solidarity.
 He has made that question a constant matter of concern for the Government of Niger.
 On behalf of the Government of Niger, allow me here to extend our warm gratitude to Algeria, Burkino Faso and France, whose mediation made it possible to arrive at this fortunate conclusion.
 The Ouagadougou Agreement, which was signed last Sunday, 9 October 1994, and which entered into force today, 11 October 1994, will allow the people of Niger to devote itself to the critical issues of development in a calm atmosphere.
 It opens the way to national reconciliation among the sons of the same geographical region, united by history and inspired by the same will - that of living together.
 It hopes that the international community will assist by providing material and financial resources to ensure the return and integration of the refugees.
 It has concluded an agreement with the Bretton Woods institutions on economic recovery, and negotiations are now under way for the conclusion of an agreement on the facility for strengthened structural adjustment.
 The development of the situation in the Middle East which led to the establishment of the Palestinian authority in Gaza, like the logic of peace and dialogue which now prevails between Israel and the other Arab countries, is part of this new dynamic.
 How can we fail to be gratified that President Jean-Bertrand Aristide will soon arrive on Haitian soil after three long years in forced exile?
 These are indeed major events which encourage us to hope that we will see a rapid return of peace wherever it may have been shattered or wherever it is threatened.
 Throughout the world - in Africa, in Asia and in America and in Europe - the last vestiges of the cold war are fading away to open the way for a fruitful partnership among nations.
 How can we have allowed such a tragedy to take place without having used all the means and resources available to the international community in time to prevent, if not limit, the unprecedented massacres which were perpetrated?
 Because it is aware that nothing lasting can be conceived and realized in Rwanda without peace and unity among its sons Niger made its modest contribution to the restoration of peace in Rwanda by participating in the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR).
 Niger expresses the same hopes for peace and stability in neighbouring Burundi and welcomes the significant progress made recently, which has resulted in its acquiring authorities who can pursue the work of consolidating the peace.
 Quite close to Rwanda, peace is making great strides also in a country which has been engaged in war and suffering since its independence, namely, Mozambique.
 The situation in Angola is a matter of concern for my delegation.
 Indeed, it must do all in its power to maintain a significant United Nations presence, which alone can guarantee lasting peace in Somalia.
 My country is gratified that, after 46 years of hostilities, Jordan and Israel agreed to sign a peace agreement on 25 July 1994 - this less than a year after the signing of the agreement between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
 Clearly, the world today has gone from a period of confrontation to one of cooperation.
 However, it is up to the United Nations to devote particular attention to other regions and other peoples which, through their vitality and economic dynamism, could also contribute to the implementation of the ideals of the Charter.
 The most recent events in this conflict have demonstrated to those who still had doubts that the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina is deliberate and is supported by the leaders of the Serbian community who have made force the primary basis for their actions.
 While it is true that risks of armed confrontation between the super-Powers have today disappeared allowing unimaginable progress in the area of disarmament, this has not led to that strengthening of security which we were entitled to expect.
 A producer of uranium, Niger has ratified the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and will support, during the negotiations to take place next year, its extension and the universal nature it must acquire.
 Other efforts should also be made to control conventional weapons and, in a general fashion, to establish confidence-building measures among States.
 How many savings could have been made from the resources allotted to peace-keeping if the minimum had been allotted to development?
 Indeed, as you so eloquently pointed out on 20 September last after your election, Mr. President, the economic and social situation at the international level is experiencing alarming developments marked by the stamp of uncertainty and adversity for the developing countries, and for Africa in particular.
 In this regard, Africa for two decades now has seemed a desperate case, despite its abundant natural wealth.
 To be sure, progress has been made economically and socially, but in comparison with the rest of the world such progress seems insignificant, and in certain respects entire areas have become settled in a situation of non-development.
 Thus, while certain countries in Asia are experiencing expansion with trends of accelerated growth, Africa's economic prospects continue to remain mediocre.
 Today, more than 350 million Africans are living in abject poverty, more than half of them women and children.
 Paradoxically, Africa also shows the signs of a vibrant continent capable of the greatest economic prowess, as long as the international community gives it the opportunity and the means to achieve its potential.
 I should like to recall Niger's position on a particular aspect of this responsibility, namely, the debt.
 Thus, Niger urges the developed countries to cancel the debts of the developing countries and if necessary to give priority to the least developed countries.
 Along with the debt the continued deterioration of the terms of trade is a subject of great concern for Niger.
 To be competitive, some of these countries have devalued their currency by half, despite the difficult economic, social and political consequences.
 But what the developing countries, and especially the least-developed countries, need most is the establishment of a genuine fund for development assured of lasting resources.
 It is recognized today that the Bretton Woods institutions have reached their limits in development matters.
 The conditions attached to World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans are often a genuine impediment to attaining the developing countries' purpose in negotiating the loan agreements.
 In his report "An Agenda for Development", the Secretary-General rightly notes that peace is the development; the economy is the engine of progress; the environment is a basis for sustainability; and social justice is a pillar of society.
 We hope that it will put forward concrete ways and means to ensure implementation of the development programmes and strategies adopted by the General Assembly over the last few years.
 The forthcoming major international conferences - the World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World Conference on Women and the Second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements - provide opportunities for us further to enrich this Agenda.
 Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The Government and people of Botswana salute your elevation to the Presidency of the forty-ninth session of the Assembly.
 Your election by acclamation is a fitting tribute not only to your personal distinction but also to the African continent, on whose soil you were bred and nurtured.
 It goes without saying, therefore, that the confidence we repose in you as you guide our deliberations is beyond measure.
 The Secretary-General's legendary tenacity of purpose at the helm of our Organization has continued to serve us very well indeed.
 He remains undaunted by the complexities of the problems he faces as the world's chief diplomat and peacemaker in an era marred by the continuing absence of peace.
 That is to be celebrated, and should be celebrated.
 Unfortunately, the energies and resources that the international community could be deploying to help buttress and nurture emerging democracies have to be expended on the search for solutions to a multiplicity of intractable civil wars.
 Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the United Nations peacekeeping commitments are threatening to overwhelm the Organization's capacities.
 Financial resources to sustain these commitments may soon dry up, if indeed they are available, in tandem with the drying up of support for peace-keeping generally, particularly among the big contributors.
 The past year has been a year of mixed blessings for Africa.
 The continent won a major victory with the liberation of South Africa from the shackles of apartheid and racism.
 Three-and-a-half centuries of white minority domination have ended, and the construction of a new non-racial society has begun in earnest in South Africa.
 We welcome the new South Africa into our midst with open arms.
 Southern Africa, the erstwhile cockpit of conflict, has suddenly found salvation and begun the process of reconstruction and regional cooperation and integration.
 Since peace and stability are universal prerequisites for orderly economic and social development, both of which we have begun to savour in southern Africa, there is every reason why we should be excited about the future of our region.
 With the holding of multiparty elections in the sister Republic of Mozambique, the process of democratization in the region will have come closer than ever before to culmination.
 Increasingly, the region is being guided in the ordering of its political affairs by a set of common democratic values.
 Through the Southern African Development Community's economic fraternity, mechanisms are being developed to promote regional approaches to the protection of human rights and the safeguarding of the democratic milieu that the region has laboured so hard and shed so much blood to bring about.
 As an example, I would mention the case of Lesotho, about which members will have heard.
 It was regional conflict-resolution and diplomacy at their very best.
 Yet we remain troubled and pained by the fact that not all is well in other parts of the African continent by any stretch of the imagination.
 Our south western sister Republic of Angola has never had a moment of tranquillity, peace or stability ever since it attained its independence 19 years ago.
 Blood has continued to flow in that tortured country in ever-increasing profusion, even as we are told the Lusaka talks are on the verge of a successful conclusion.
 This is the precious blood of innocent Angolans shed needlessly because the multiparty democracy demanded by UNITA and its supporters was won three years ago, only to be subjected to another round of brutal civil war.
 We remain hopeful, however, that the marathon talks in Lusaka, capital of the Republic of Zambia, will produce an agreement for the parties to implement without reservation.
 The Somali tragedy remains intractable.
 The presence in the fractured country of 18,000 United Nations peace-keeping troops, including Botswanans, has not made much of a difference in the restoration of peace and tranquillity to the Somali people.
 The decision to withdraw the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) must be carefully weighed against the obvious consequences of the vacuum it will create.
 The madness that is being displayed by the warring factions there is surely beyond comprehension.
 Although the carnage has ended in Rwanda, the tragedy that has befallen its people has not.
 Rwanda cannot endure any more cycles of civil war and genocidal massacres.
 The tens or hundreds of thousands of refugees encamped at present in the neighbouring countries must be helped to return to their homeland lest out of the frustrations of exile in their squalid refugee camps they ignite another cycle of genocide.
 On the perennial question of Western Sahara, Botswana shares the view that it is taking far too long to hold a referendum in the Territory to allow the Sahraoui people to decide their future.
 The Territory cannot and must not be allowed to mark time forever in a limbo of uncertainty as if the fulfillment of the aspirations of its people can be delayed until their final submission.
 Beyond the African continent, the agony of Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued to outrage the conscience of mankind.
 The senseless bloodletting in that tormented region of Europe remains stubbornly impervious to solution.
 Peace plan after peace plan has failed to impress one side or the other, and the result is that the patience of the international community, which has to deploy enormous resources to maintain a massive peace-keeping presence in the area, is being tested beyond endurance.
 The question we ask is: How can the perpetrators of that cruel conflict ever make sense out of it? We appeal to them to stop the carnage.
 Meanwhile, we urge the International Tribunal set up to bring to justice the authors and perpetrators of that barbarous war to spare no effort in doing so.
 They have a golden opportunity to do so and to resume the journey they started three years ago towards a democratic future.
 Intractable problems all over the world, are being resolved through negotiations, and we do not believe that the cold war between Cuba and the United States is beyond resolution by negotiation.
 We hope that this time the parties involved in the war dance are merely trying to exorcise the demons of the politics of brinkmanship, without any intention whatsoever of bringing world peace to the brink and beyond.
 The arbitrary division of the island of Cyprus remains unrepaired.
 We urge the parties to reintensify their search for a mutually acceptable dispensation that will make possible the reunification of the island and its people.
 The same applies to the two Koreas.
 The people of the North and South are Koreans in every sense and soon they must realize that, like the people of South Africa, who have just triumphed over racial division, they too can triumph if they try harder, over ideological division.
 We live in the age of dialogue and negotiation, the age of reconciliation and forgiveness.
 No one will be excused for refusing to negotiate an end to a disagreement.
 Over the past two decades my country has experienced an unprecedented period of economic growth.
 After being viewed as one of the world's poorest countries, with a per capita income estimated at $70, Botswana suddenly became Africa's success story, a success born out of a stable, democratic political system and a free-market economy.
 Our democratic system is now so entrenched that it has become our nation's second nature.
 The happy result is that Botswana is free from any ethnic or tribal conflict.
 Regrettably, we have not been spared the wrath of the world recession and have thus experienced dramatic declines in growth rates. Our economic growth, heavily influenced by the development of minerals, particularly diamonds, has experienced adverse effects arising from the fall in the price of diamonds.
 Our country has entered the most challenging period since independence.
 Africa as a whole is engaged, in one form or another, in economic and political reforms that need the support and cooperation of the donor community and the multilateral financial institutions.
 Poverty is an underlying factor of underdevelopment that many African countries have to contend with today.
 Regrettably, implementation of the structural adjustment programme, welcome as it is in the restructuring of African economies, has in many instances worsened the social conditions of the poor in the short term.
 This is why Botswana looks forward to the forthcoming World Summit on Social Development, where we will have the opportunity to address these anomalies in a very serious manner.
 Botswana is encouraged by the ongoing process of reform and revitalization of the United Nations in the economic, social and related fields.
 It is our hope that these changes will bring about efficiency and effectiveness in addressing the needs and concerns of developing countries at the policy-making and operational levels.
 In this era, the democracy that is being preached at national level should pervade the international system.
 In implementing these ideals, it is necessary to bear in mind the need for equitable geographical representation, which emphasizes increased permanent membership for developing countries, particularly in Africa."
 We are due to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of this Organization.
 The United Nations has amply vindicated its existence.
 It survived the distractions and ravages of the cold war with its sense of purpose relatively intact.
 Botswana's fidelity to the purposes and principles of the Organization's Charter remains unstinting.
 The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.
 Mr. Lima (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese; interpretation from French text furnished by the delegation): Allow me first of all, Sir, to congratulate you warmly on your noteworthy election as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Furthermore, your personal competence and the rich diplomatic experience you have acquired over the years are a guarantee of the success of our deliberations.
 My country, Guinea-Bissau, which holds one of the vice-presidencies, wishes to assure you of its total availability and fullest cooperation.
 Our thanks and congratulations also go to your illustrious predecessor, Mr. Samuel Insanally, for the wisdom with which he guided the work of the forty-eighth session.
 The general debate of the forty-ninth session reflects the logic of the post-cold-war period, in which the burden of blocs, ideological confrontations and threats of nuclear has been lightened, thus creating favourable conditions for a new type of relationship between nations and peoples.
 Today more than ever, our Organization is called upon to face the challenges of international politics in a different way.
 The positive trend emerging on the international level thanks to joint efforts by many parties to preserve this trend is nonetheless being thwarted by various hotbeds of tension and conflict in different regions of the world.
 Guinea-Bissau, aware of this fact and of its harmful consequences, is firmly committed to the promotion of a new international conscience, based on respect for human values.
 The United Nations, in order to better respond to the requirements of our times, must take these new challenges into account and thus undertake the necessary reforms.
 The universally hailed end of bipolarization in international relations has brought about a rebirth of hope for a new era of peace.
 Alas, the world is still the theatre of tragic and unforeseeable events.
 Drought and desertification, which bring disorder to that continent, diminish its productive capacity and provoke famine, is now being compounded by fratricidal wars.
 In Angola, the people continue to be victims of suffering and atrocities.
 We repeat our congratulations to the Government and to the Resist\x{763d}cia Nacional Mo\x{84f7}mbicana, and urge them to persevere along this road, which should lead to the holding of multiparty elections in the coming days.
 In Liberia, the situation remains virtually unchanged, despite numerous agreements concluded between the parties concerned.
 If it continues, this state of affairs may imperil the stability of the subregion.
 My Government welcomes the international community's unified actions on behalf of these two countries, in particular "Operation Turquoise," undertaken by France.
 The peace agreement signed between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, which provides for mutual recognition by the two parties, and the agreement between Israel and Jordan represent important steps toward the creation of lasting peace in the region.
 Regarding Cuba, my country encourages dialogue between the United States and that country to find a solution to the question of the embargo, the repercussions of which have a major impact on the population.
 In the case of Haiti, we are pleased to note that after many efforts by the United Nations and the Organization of American States, the fundamental rights of the Haitian people have finally been re-established and democracy restored with the return of the constitutionally elected President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
 Respect for human rights is a factor for peace and a guarantee of international stability.
 The full exercise of individual rights presupposes the existence of objective conditions of economic and social organization based on justice and equity.
 The international community must promote more just and constructive cooperation between States to combat the perverse effects of poverty and improve material conditions in the most needy countries and among the most handicapped populations.
 As a full-fledged Member of the United Nations, the Republic of China in Taiwan, with its 20,000,000 inhabitants and its highly advanced stage of economic and technological development, could play a preponderant role on the international scene.
 Guinea-Bissau has just carried out multiparty legislative and presidential elections, which were considered just and transparent by our people and by international observers.
 These elections, which showed the good citizenship and maturity of the people of Guinea-Bissau, took place in a climate of exemplary civilian peace.
 All the people of Guinea-Bissau and our country's national unity, stability and development were winners.
 At this new stage in the history of our country we are of course counting on our people's determination, but also on the international community's support.
 We believe that the achievement of the objectives after more than eight years of negotiations, resulting in the Declaration of Marrakesh, should have beneficial consequences for the developing countries, thus enabling trade to play its efficient role as a motor for development.
 This extremely painful situation is a significant cause of the developing countries' external indebtedness.
 The external debt of the developing countries in general and of the African countries in particular remains an unbearable burden for their economies and a major obstacle to their development.
 Guinea-Bissau, with the support of its principal economic partners, is continuing its efforts to find an appropriate and lasting solution to the debt problem, which has serious consequences for its socio-economic development.
 Similarly, we support the rapid implementation of the "Agenda for Development".
 The problem of desertification represents a major concern for the Government of Guinea-Bissau, a country which, because it is located in the Sudano-Sahelian region, is faced with persistent irregularities in rainfall, as well as massive invasions of insects that destroy agricultural production.
 The social and economic development activities of the United Nations are in our view aimed in particular at the most vulnerable groups - women, children, young people, the aged and the handicapped.
 In fact, the solution of the problem lies in a better development of North-South cooperation.
 If there is to be progress in the developing countries, health and education systems must be upgraded, and machinery must be established to eradicate hunger and poverty and improve living conditions in the world.
 The international community is capable of meeting the challenges facing it and of resolving complex problems.
 The President (interpretation from French): The next speaker is the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Economic Development and Attorney General of Belize, His Excellency the Honourable Dean Barrow, on whom I now call.
 Mr. Barrow (Belize): The delegation of Belize warmly congratulates you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 We are proud that such an illustrious son of Africa has been selected to preside over our deliberations in this period leading up to the celebration of the Organization's fiftieth anniversary year.
 Permit me too to express my delegation's thanks and praise for the sterling performance of your immediate predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Samuel Insanally of Guyana.
 And of the year just past it might perhaps be said that it was the best of times and the worst of times.
 Furthermore, the peace in the Middle East, presaged by the Agreement on Palestinian self-rule, is taking root.
 Tension on the Korean peninsula has eased, and the cease-fire in Northern Ireland represents a hitherto unimaginable breakthrough.
 On the other hand, the pall of nuclear weapons still hangs over our fragile planet.
 So does the gloom of conventional armaments, the din of battle and the smell of rotting flesh in the Balkans, parts of our beloved Africa and western and central Asia.
 The initial paralysis of will of the world community, our belated response in the face of horrible genocide, has not been our finest hour.
 That hesitation, that failure of leadership, underscores the need for the United Nations system's preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping mechanisms to be better developed as a matter of urgency.
 The fact is that there is still rampant lawlessness abroad on our planet, and we continue to be traumatized by the death and destruction it brings.
 In this sort of depressing world political climate, even small countries such as mine must do what we can to ease the pain.
 We took seriously the Security Council's particular invitation to regional States and hope now that the collective response will succeed in giving our beleaguered sister republic surcease from its unhappy history and a chance of lasting peace and true democracy.
 We salute the Haitian people and we congratulate President Aristide.
 In Belize's own neighbourhood, the redemocratization of the Central American isthmus continues apace.
 In the last year, the free elections and orderly transitions of power that have taken place in Panama, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Honduras have vindicated our new-found, or rather rediscovered, destiny.
 Furthermore, that country has undertaken, in its letter to the Secretary-General (A/49/94 of 14 March 1994) to abide by pacific principles and good-neighbourliness in its relations with my country.
 As a Member of this Organization, with our historical and constitutional land and sea borders universally recognized as inviolable in accordance with the principles of self-determination, sovereignty and territorial integrity, Belize welcomes this Guatemalan commitment.
 It is a further encouragement to regional peace.
 Talking of peace, we note with interest the development of the concept of stand-by forces.
 This idea needs to be deepened and refined, and arrangements should be made for appropriate training in regional training centres.
 In this regard, Belize's offer to serve as one such locale, making special use of our jungle terrain and facilities, is a matter of record.
 What we are saying is that security and world order must be significantly improved.
 Mankind and the vision of our founders must be vindicated.
 In that light, we reiterate the call we made during last year's debate for reform of the Security Council.
 We call on all parties in good faith to continue their various dialogues to resolve this issue.
 We applaud the transformation of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and these other advances, while urging that the less well-endowed countries receive their due, both under domestic jurisdictions and laws and in adjudications by the new organization.
 We are satisfied at the expansion of the institution of non-discrimination into such new areas as trade in services and trade-related investment measures.
 We hope, however, that the thread of liberalism that runs through these new instruments will not become a noose to suffocate those of us that did not inherit a head start.
 We therefore call for sensitivity in the application of those various provisions for special and differential treatment of such countries.
 Even as the global order swings to and fro, we call for improvement of the various mechanisms as they affect our sensitive economies.
 In Belize we have begun our own adjustment process.
 This is necessary if we are to cope with the initial dislocations to small economies, which will be the inevitable consequence of the new international trading realities.
 As well, the profligate behaviour of the central Government between September 1989 and June 1993 had resulted in an unmanageable deficit, precipitously declining reserves and imprudent short-term, high-interest foreign borrowing.
 So we seek now to restore fiscal discipline and regain macro-economic stability.
 We are also intent on removing the traditional distortions inherent in the domestic trading regime, and on instituting tax reform that will eliminate our overreliance on import duties.
 This is a process that we must manage carefully, since drastic reductions in public expenditure and trade liberalization will work initial hardship on our local economy.
 In this context, the Bretton Woods institutions have a duty to respond to our special circumstances.
 Support for our public and private sectors must be forthcoming, for the brave new economic world that we must enter, whether voluntarily or otherwise, will no doubt prove a most inhospitable clime to those not clothed with the requisite garb.
 In particular, the funds for skills training, human resource development and poverty alleviation must be found.
 Our young people are already hostage to the subculture of violence perpetrated as much by the television images transported undiluted from the first world, as by the indigenous problems peculiar to our small societies.
 The hope-extinguishing cycle of alienation, joblessness and incarceration must be broken.
 Otherwise, those nice new economic edifices we are so carefully constructing will come crashing to the ground, undone by the confrontation and social chaos that continued marginalization of our youth will surely engender.
 And the case for urgent Bretton Woods social and economic assistance should be even more compelling in the instance of voluntary, vis--vis imposed, structural adjustment.
 Yet, we must deal with reality.
 The development decades and the new international economic order were, in part, chimeric or exercises in rhetoric.
 In fact, let it be a fully programmed model that entirely anticipates what lies ahead.
 We are grateful that this Organization is also taking note of the unfulfilled promises of the Second World War order.
 It is now 53 years since the call for social justice went out in the Four Freedoms and the Atlantic Charter.
 Yet we are far from freedom from want and improved social security.
 Now, with the recently concluded Conference on Population and Development, and with the World Conference on Women and the World Summit for Social Development just before us, the opportunity is here again.
 Let us also develop this Organization's capacity for technical assistance in crime prevention and interdiction to those United Nations Members which are increasingly beset by the scourge of violence, weapons and narcotics.
 These plagues are, almost invariably, brought on by demands and excesses imported from thousands of miles away, mostly with the aid of the electronic media.
 Despite unfair criticism, the Secretariat has done what it could to carry out the promises made in the Charter.
 Another relatively recent watchword is sustainability.
 It has a redolence to which we have all taken with alacrity.
 It warns the well-endowed of the truth of the adage "Waste not, want not".
 It reminds the less fortunate to try to resolve their dilemma wisely, as necessity obliges them to reduce their woodlands while leaching the present vitality of the land.
 We have seen the Commission for Sustainable Development and the Global Environment Facility take their faltering first steps.
 While they are to some extent further examples of the somewhat unstructured way in which the Organization is sometimes obliged to operate, we nevertheless commend those agencies.
 And we sincerely hope that sustainability will keep us whole.
 We all recently participated in the stimulating exercise of establishing the post of High Commissioner for Human Rights.
 We have seen the number of instruments on that subject increase.
 Human rights bodies have become more experienced and effective.
 Even in the field of population and development, we notice how the recent Cairo Programme of Action uses human rights as its main point of departure.
 It is striking that, in places, that document alphabetizes the basic species of human rights.
 So did the Assembly's resolution establishing the post of High Commissioner.
 That is to say, cultural, economic and social rights are as much our concern as civil and political rights.
 The coincidence of development with population and other concerns in the Cairo document, and the stress of the right to development both in the resolution establishing the post of High Commissioner and in the Cairo document, underscore the coequal importance of that category of right.
 I believe that we are now seeing the beginning of the concretization of international concern about a wider range of human rights for individuals and, I beg to stress, groups and peoples.
 Above all, these recent developments in the field of human rights, sustainable development and social justice are pointing us to the reality that values must become an integral part of statecraft and of diplomacy.
 In our fledgling world order, my subregion of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) has begun to show signs of coming of age.
 We have established several new structures for subregional integration and cooperation.
 We recently joined our friends and neighbours in the non-English-speaking Caribbean and proximate mainland areas in signing a treaty to establish an ambitious Association of Caribbean States designed to bring about coordination, concentration and cooperation in our far-flung proto-region.
 Even before this, CARICOM had begun to develop separate cooperative relationships with Central America, Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela.
 In all of these endeavours, it has become more widely noted that Belize is ideally situated to assist with this bringing together of various subregions.
 We are equidistant from Tijuana and Paramaribo and, in other respects, are at the very centre of this new Caribbean.
 Besides, Belize has a history and a polity which well equip us for this role.
 This is an important aspect of the world order.
 It is also the quintessential example of the need for reform and revitalization of this Organization.
 The General Assembly's health is generally quite good.
 One such area is the roster for this general debate.
 The annual seating arrangements for our numerous members are made quite democratically and scientifically.
 What is the justification for annually placing certain nations at certain positions at the end of the list? I remember that the Christian Bible makes flattering references to what comes "Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings" (The Bible, Psalms 8:2).
 With many others, we call for the development of an improved system of coordination here at Headquarters of the structure of the Organization's machinery in the social and economic sectors.
 More thought must also be given to the rationalization and coordination of the Organization's multifarious development agencies in the field.
 Even as the World Trade Organization and the Bretton Woods institutions develop their separate complexes of structures and prescriptions, my delegation sees a greater need for overall coordination by this premier Organization.
 The United Nations must be appropriately developed as the first among equals within the global organizational system.
 But equitable distribution of staff posts and responsibilities within all United Nations bodies must be radically improved.
 Above all, the United Nations must learn to speak to, not at, the peoples of the world.
 He should continue to find bully pulpits in the global electronic information meeting-place, for the need to sound the themes that underline the continuing vitality of our world body is particularly urgent at this time.
 After all, in the run-up to our fiftieth anniversary we must be able to give a proper account of our stewardship, to withstand the special scrutiny we will surely now provoke.
 Mr. Mallet (Saint Lucia): Permit me, Sir, to extend to you the congratulations of my country and of my delegation on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 Added to this is your well-known commitment to the ideals and principles that govern this Organization.
 These qualities together serve to provide us with every confidence that under your distinguished guidance our deliberations cannot but be productive in the furtherance of the objectives of this world body.
 My delegation salutes both President Mandela and Vice President de Klerk for their courage and determination in working together to consolidate their strong beginnings in the direction of a multiracial democracy.
 However, my delegation is still deeply concerned about some other countries in Africa, which continue to wage a hopeless battle against poverty, disease, debt settlement and political strife.
 It is important that more attention be given to the economic welfare of Africa to prevent other unfortunate massacres similar to those witnessed in Rwanda and Somalia.
 It is indeed anomalous that a country already making a valuable contribution on the international stage should continue to find itself debarred from participation in the family of nations.
 However, my delegation notes with some concern the renewed potential for conflict between Iraq and Kuwait, and again calls upon the Government of Iraq to recognize and respect the territorial integrity of the State of Kuwait.
 The devastating conflict in the former Yugoslavia, which the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has lamented has spared no one in its violence, remains, like several other conflicts around the world, a major focus of peace-keeping and humanitarian efforts by the United Nations.
 The net effect of such calamities goes beyond the urgent call for a global response, in that it creates new stresses in the developing world, through the diversion of scarce resources away from peaceful development, into attenuating human suffering.
 My delegation therefore wholeheartedly supports efforts by the Secretary-General to foster greater regional involvement in conflict-resolution and in the creation of appropriate humanitarian support structures.
 The response to this mounting threat resides in a universal blueprint aimed at reversing the economic and social ills from which it springs.
 In this regard my delegation supports the Secretary-General's Agenda for Development.
 The International Conference on Population and Development, held in Cairo this year, was a powerful initiative, however contentious some of the issues may have been.
 Saint Lucia is of the view that the issues leading to the isolation of Cuba from the mainstream of economic and social development within our hemisphere are overdue for re-examination.
 My delegation expresses the hope that this agreement will open new vistas for further dialogue and greater understanding between the two countries.
 Like other countries of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), Saint Lucia shares the vision of hope for Haiti.
 We are proud to be a participant in the United Nations Mission in Haiti, as we have participated in former means of assistance to Haiti, and, along with our CARICOM counterparts, assisted by the wider international community, will work tirelessly for the successful implantation of true democracy in Haiti.
 The unfolding events of the past few days give added impetus to the efforts of the regional and international community to bring Haiti towards self-fulfilment within the community of democratic nations.
 It has been made clear that the holding of democratic elections and the installation of a legitimate Government cannot by themselves guarantee democracy, especially in a country devoid of democratic traditions.
 To sustain such democratic beginnings, appropriate structures must be put in place, adequately resourced in both human and material terms, and suitable support mechanisms must be designed and firmly rooted.
 The global economic situation is at present at a critical crossroads, reflecting a speedily moving trend towards trade liberalization and the need for national economies to improve their own efficiency and competitiveness.
 The constraints of smallness have continually conspired against States like Saint Lucia in terms of its ability meaningfully to raise its gross domestic product.
 Saint Lucia's economy, for instance, has already experienced the shock resulting from changes brought about by the advent of the European Union.
 The Government of Saint Lucia has been observing with some concern the development of the North American Free Trade Association (NAFTA), given the serious adverse consequences it will have in the medium term and long term for relatively nascent industries and the micro-economies of our small States.
 My Government regrets that United States legislation on NAFTA contains no expressed arrangement which takes into account the limits of our industrial base.
 In this regard we appeal to the international community for special trade considerations while adjustments are made to meet the international challenges that the world economic environment engenders.
 We hope the international community will be helpful in encouraging this self-help initiative to achieve its full potential.
 Arising out of the universal blueprint emerging from that Conference is the recognition, at last, of the peculiar circumstances of small island developing States in their pursuit of sustainable development.
 Designing development policies and implementing programmes for small island States such as Saint Lucia require considerable imagination and ingenuity, as was shown by the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, held in Barbados earlier this year.
 A successful follow-up to that Conference would rely heavily on financial resources for the implementation of its findings.
 Our small island State, Saint Lucia, seems to oscillate between triumph and disaster.
 Last year we highlighted our triumphs in the recognition of our two Nobel laureates.
 This year the disastrous hand of nature in the form of tropical storm "Debbie" struck Saint Lucia, dramatically emphasizing the vulnerability of small island developing States.
 With over 50 per cent of the working population of Saint Lucia engaged in banana-associated enterprises, and with more than 50 per cent of export earnings derived from banana exports, destruction of 60 per cent of the banana crop cannot but create serious economic and social consequences for us.
 This again underscores the vulnerability of small States like ours, and the need for the international community to recognize their special peculiarities and needs and to make appropriate provisions to facilitate their survival.
 As we focus on the milestone of the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations and its Charter, we should perceive the ideas that subtend this body as a cementing balm that would bring the disparate pieces of our shattered globe together in peace, harmony, creativity and beauty.
 Our membership has more than doubled, and, as we continue to witness the emergence of new States, social and economic demands increase, coupled with new, pressing concerns, such as the environment, women's rights, children's rights and good governance, to name a few.
 It is also necessary that this Assembly be made more effective and efficient in the execution of its functions, so that it can become more responsive to the needs particularly of developing countries, and can assist those countries in their development processes.
 Saint Lucia joins scores of other delegates in calling for an increase in the membership of the Security Council to reflect the increase in membership of this Organization and the concept of universality that the Charter advocates.
 It is also necessary that the Security Council allow for more consultation with the General Assembly in its deliberations so that its perspectives may become even more reflective of the world community.
 "Break a vase and the love that reassembles the fragments is stronger than that love which took its symmetry for granted when it was whole."
 We see in this idea the touchstone for the United Nations and the international community as this Organization approaches its anniversary year.
 Mr. Pursoo (Grenada): My delegation is pleased to convey warmest greetings from the Government and people of Grenada to the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 We are indeed proud of his performance.
 Grenada is pleased to welcome the new South Africa to the United Nations, and we pay special tribute to His Excellency President Nelson Mandela for his resolute will and firm determination in the fight against apartheid, which eventually resulted in this new, democratic and non-racial South Africa.
 Grenada is pleased that in recent efforts to bring an end to the illegal seizure of power by the military in Haiti and to halt the ensuing human rights abuses there diplomacy prevailed and further bloodshed was averted.
 We now eagerly await the reinstatement of the duly elected Government and its President, Father Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and the return of democracy to Haiti.
 We support the actions taken by the United States of America and other multinational forces in implementation of United Nations resolutions on Haiti, and we join like-minded nations as they move to establish the structures in which development and democracy can be sustained.
 Grenada is prepared to do its part to ensure a more fertile ground for the growth of democracy in Haiti, our sister Caribbean country.
 We are proud that, within the limits of our resources, personnel from Grenada's law enforcement services are among the multinational contingent to help in "Operation Uphold Democracy".
 After all, it was 11 years ago this month that Grenada itself profited from a similar multinational operation, affording us the historic opportunity to restore democratic principles to our way of life.
 Over the last several years many of the small developing countries within this Organization have been experiencing growing economic problems.
 The forced response has been to take stringent corrective measures aimed at stabilizing their economies and creating the conditions for sustainable development.
 Speaking specifically of my own country, Grenada, I can inform the Assembly that in 1992 we embarked on a voluntary three-year structural adjustment programme in an effort to correct serious fiscal imbalances and to put the country on a path of sustained growth.
 This year marks the end of the programme, and I am happy to report that some success has been achieved.
 The Government has significantly reduced the fiscal deficits from 25 per cent of gross domestic product in 1992 to 11 per cent in 1993 and 9 per cent to date.
 Moreover, Grenada's credit rating has improved notably, with its creditworthiness restored by the World Bank in June of this year after having been forfeited in 1988.
 Whatever success has been recorded by that programme is a credit to regionalism, since the programme was instituted with enormous regional inputs.
 Grenada wishes publicly to thank the regional Governments and institutions which contributed to the effort.
 You, Mr. President, are well aware that a topic of particular currency in the area of international economic relations is the issue of trade and investment.
 Of course, over the past months new trading blocs have been created, with the result that in the Western Hemisphere we now have several such arrangements, which include the very important North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
 While all the implications of NAFTA are not yet known, we must nevertheless now seek to position our economies to interface with the realities of this new economic environment.
 In that context, the conclusion of the latest round of the negotiations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) has very far-reaching consequences for trade.
 The removal of access to market arrangements traditionally favourable to fledgling industries in our societies - the banana industry, for example - compounds our difficulties and presents a major threat to the overall well-being of our small economies.
 We are cognizant of the fact that we must now seek to enhance our productivity and competitiveness in carefully selected areas if we are to survive in this era of trade liberalization.
 But, more often than not, we cannot do it alone, and this is why my delegation appeals to the developed countries to be considerate of our fragile economies and the need to adapt to this seemingly hostile economic environment.
 The advances made since the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development must be built upon, and in this regard the importance of forging new global partnerships between developed and developing countries ought to be given priority.
 The protection of the global climate and biological diversity, the sustainable use and conservation of all marine resources and the protection of our oceans and high seas require urgent international assistance and cooperation.
 For several years Grenada has expressed its concern at the apparent unbalanced resource commitment to security issues versus development.
 Consequently, my delegation commends recently expanded efforts aimed at giving greater prominence to the development needs confronting the world, particularly in the developing countries.
 We applaud the Secretary-General's report "An Agenda for Development" and we applaud the former President of the General Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Samuel Insanally, for his visionary initiative in organizing the World Hearings on Development in June of this year.
 We urge that the momentum gained therefrom be maintained, and we wish to place on record our support for Brazil's call for a global conference on development in the year 1996.
 The question of population and development is a very sensitive issue, one that demands continuous conscientious global effort.
 Grenada is encouraged by the consensus which emerged from the recently concluded International Conference on Population and Development at Cairo, and we are hopeful that increasingly balanced development will be viewed as the essential basis on which to treat the issue of population.
 We are also confident that the Conference on Women to be held at Beijing in 1995 will address one of the long-standing issues critical to development, that is, the issue of women in development.
 In March of 1995 world leaders will gather in Copenhagen to address one of the most pressing questions of our time, the question of social development.
 We will be asked to rule particularly in the interest of youth, the aged, the disabled and all those outside the mainstream of social integration.
 Grenada is confident that the World Summit for Social Development and all the other follow-ups to the Rio Conference are replacing despair with hope worldwide.
 For example, we are concerned that environmental causes should not be used as barriers to access for goods produced in developing countries to the markets of those with more prosperous economies.
 We hope that, on the contrary, the developed countries will appreciate the need to assist the poorer countries to gain access to the technologies and technological know-how necessary to the promotion of more-balanced development on a global scale.
 Stability within and between States is a prerequisite for international peace and security.
 Grenada is encouraged by certain developments, beginning almost a year ago with the signing of the historic peace treaty between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
 We believe that the emergence of self-rule in Jericho and Gaza is of great significance.
 We look forward to further positive developments in the Middle East peace process and wish all the countries in that region the peace and stability upon which lasting prosperity will be built.
 Grenada is encouraged by the diplomatic efforts in the search for a permanent solution to the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 We fully support the establishment of the International Tribunal to try allegations of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia.
 By the same token, Grenada fully supports similar initiatives in response to situations in other parts of the world, where these are deemed appropriate.
 We also wish to convey our appreciation to the relief agencies and others whose tireless efforts have saved lives, restored health to the sick and hungry and brought comfort to countless victims - particularly women and children.
 My delegation wishes to underscore the importance of human rights, freedom and good governance as vital preconditions to domestic quietude, international harmony and the creation of the climate necessary for the achievement of progress within societies.
 In this regard, the promotion and protection of the rights of children is an issue that cries out for greater attention.
 Deliberate efforts must be expedited at various levels, global and national, to ensure the promotion and protection of children's rights.
 Likewise, in this the International Year of the Family and beyond, emphasis should continue to be placed on the pivotal role of the family in national and global development.
 The end of the cold-war era presents opportunities for a shift from political and ideological divide to cooperation in the areas of economic and social development.
 New economic Powers on the world scene seek to occupy positions that were once the prerogative of the traditional super-Powers.
 Reforms currently being undertaken in the United Nations system provide an opportunity to examine the question of expanding the Security Council and the question of the veto power in the light of these new realities.
 We believe that this appeal from the 21 million people of the Republic of China in Taiwan for a voice and proper representation in the international community is both moral and legitimate.
 The inclusion of the Republic of China in Taiwan in the United Nations would further contribute to global cooperation in trade, economic development and environmental and ecological protection.
 So long as drug traffickers and international arms dealers continue to ply their trade, and so long as mercenaries, terrorists and other adventurists exist, the protection and security of small States will remain particularly vulnerable to acts of aggression, from without as well as from within.
 While the United Nations Charter recognizes the right of States to take measures in self-defence, the reality is that often small States faced with serious threats lack the means to do so.
 Small States invariably look to the provisions of the United Nations Charter to secure respect for and preservation of their sovereignty.
 It is therefore necessary that the protection and security of small States remain a very pertinent issue among the concerns of the United Nations.
 As we embark upon preparations for the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations in 1995, let us train our sights on the factors that brought the United Nations into being in the first instance and on what gives the Organization its special worthiness.
 The challenge is to attain and maintain long-term global peace and stability and to enhance the prospects for solving global problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian nature.
 To this end, we as a community of nations must rededicate ourselves to working ever relentlessly and concertedly towards the goal of making our planet a safer, better and happier place in which to live.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Burundi, His Excellency, Mr. Jean-Marie Ngendahayo.
 Mr. Ngendahayo (Burundi) (interpretation from French): It is an honour and a privilege for me to address the Members of this Organization.
 Through your impressive election, the General Assembly has once again paid tribute to Africa and to your country, so committed to peace and international cooperation.
 I assure you that my delegation will give you every support as you strive to fulfil your mandate.
 I should also like warmly to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Samuel Insanally of the Republic of Guyana, who, as President at the forty-eighth session, guided the work of the Assembly masterfully and with exemplary commitment.
 Lastly, we pay a warm tribute to Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretary-General of the United Nations, for all the activities he has initiated in order to cope with the many challenges and enormous difficulties facing our Organization today.
 We believe that these obstacles are not insurmountable provided that there is honest commitment and solidarity on the part of the international community.
 Thanks to the resolve and perseverance of this Organization, which mobilized the Member States against apartheid, peace and democracy have now triumphed in South Africa.
 The people and the Government of Burundi have already welcomed this well-deserved victory of the valiant South African people, who have thus resumed their place in the concert of nations.
 There have been natural disasters throughout the world: famine, civil war, terrorism and other scourges of modern times, such as religious fundamentalism and the re-emergence of exclusionary movements, associations or political parties, all bearing within them the seeds of division.
 A year ago, from this very rostrum, the late President Melchior Ndadaye conveyed to this Assembly a message of peace, friendship, brotherhood and solidarity.
 This occurred just after the pluralist elections of June 1993, which the entire world had found to be free and transparent.
 Since that fateful day, Burundi has suffered a serious political, institutional, social and economic crisis, the repercussions of which are still being felt today.
 We all recall the unbearable images broadcast by the international media.
 Let us further recall that the successor to President Ndadaye, Mr. Cyprien Ntaryamira, died tragically in an airplane accident in Kigali on 6 April 1994, which also took the life of the Rwandese Head of State.
 Misfortunes never come singly; Burundi had the terrible shock of losing two Presidents in less than six months.
 This situation has profoundly traumatized the people of Burundi.
 Some wondered if Burundi would be able to avoid the human cataclysm recently experienced by its neighbour Rwanda.
 Indeed, the institutional crisis that resulted from the vacuum of power, and the various manifestations of violence that followed, crystallized latent antagonisms, exacerbated latent ethnic divisions and created an atmosphere of suspicion and intolerance that was prejudicial to peace.
 Despite the dark picture I have just painted, the people of Burundi has not succumbed to despair.
 Indeed, the registered political parties and the representatives of civil society have met in a negotiating forum and begun in-depth discussions with a view to finding ways and means of ensuring a swift return to peace, security, trust and socio-economic and political stability in the country.
 The lengthy discussions which began after the death of President Cyprien Ntaryamira last April recently led to the signing on 10 September 1994 of a government convention.
 We welcome the progress made together through this preventive diplomacy.
 They are also very important in encouraging reconstruction and the economic recovery of the country.
 The tasks ahead are enormous and cannot be carried out without the solidarity and assistance of the international community on a bilateral and/or multilateral basis.
 We also take this opportunity to recall the request made by the Government of Burundi for the organization of a neutral international inquiry to establish responsibility for the October 1993 putsch and the ensuing massacres.
 The international community has always stood by us in times of anguish and we feel sure that it will continue to support our efforts by providing emergency special assistance for economic recovery and reconstruction.
 Lasting solutions to Burundi's political problems can be found only if they are dealt with in a subregional context.
 For some years now we have been witnessing forced movements of populations following violence perpetrated in some countries of our subregion.
 These movements, often out of control, are a threat to peace and stability throughout the Great Lakes region.
 No one can fail to see that the tragedy of Rwanda has shocked human conscience at the subregional, regional and international levels.
 The crisis in Rwanda has had most regrettable consequences for neighbouring States - above all for Burundi, which has ethnic, linguistic and cultural similarities to Rwanda.
 The Rwandese tragedy has had political, security, economic, humanitarian and environmental consequences.
 We need not go into details, because the whole world saw on television the human tide flee fighting to take refuge in neighbouring countries, such as Burundi, Tanzania and Zaire.
 The refugee problem has been acute in our subregion since the 1960s.
 Some see refugees as an economic and social burden, while others consider them a threat to their security.
 In the short term, it is a matter of resolving the refugee problem. In the medium term, inter-State mechanisms should be established to safeguard peace, bolster stability and promote socio-economic development.
 Such a conference could pave the way for the creation of a more viable economic community combining existing organizations, such as the Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries and the Kagera River Basin Organization and adapting them better to the realities of our subregion.
 We believe such a conference would help integrate our States, which share an almost identical history, the same geographical space and, above all, an ability to communicate through common languages.
 My delegation is willing to make specific proposals on this matter.
 In 50 years the Organization has accomplished a great many tasks.
 It has overcome many obstacles, survived the cold war and contributed to the advent of international dente.
 Its specialized agencies have assisted millions of people in distress.
 The Organization has always committed itself to actions to maintain international peace and security.
 The United Nations has contributed to dialogue between the peoples and States of the world by encouraging relations of cooperation and solidarity.
 In Africa, the conflicts in Somalia, Angola and Liberia seem to go on for ever, notwithstanding the efforts of the United Nations to resolve them.
 At the same time, we call on the parties involved to settle their differences peacefully and to lend every possible assistance to any mediation effort.
 As to Angola, the political and military situation has continued to deteriorate, with an escalation of the fighting and greater mistrust between the belligerents.
 The Republic of Burundi pays tribute to the efforts made by ECOWAS and the United Nations to bring about a peaceful settlement of that conflict, which continues to bring such grief to the people of Liberia.
 We also support the United Nations peace plan for Western Sahara, which involves a referendum to allow the Saharan people to choose their own destiny.
 This political instability means we cannot tackle development in our countries, despite the vast natural resources of our continent.
 We firmly believe that Africa must shoulder its responsibilities and define the main lines of its development in accordance with its realities.
 We must respect our identity while accepting any positive contribution from outside.
 In other words, through the democratic reforms now under way, our continent, which is currently undergoing a period of upheaval, will attain the freedom and development it so desires.
 We pay tribute to all the countries and institutions that contributed to the mediation efforts and encourage them to continue their diplomatic efforts with a view to a final and irreversible settlement of that conflict, which has lasted far too long.
 War does not resolve problems of coexistence and good-neighborliness between peoples.
 On the Korean peninsula, we wish for the voluntary and peaceful reunification of Korea.
 As the Secretary-General pointed out so aptly in "An Agenda for Development", there can be no peace without development.
 And the 1994 World Human Development Report also states:
 "The absence of peace can indeed hinder development; but without development, peace is threatened."
 Development requires international cooperation and assistance from other States.
 The Charter sets as one of the purposes of the United Nations:
 "to achieve international cooperation in solving international ....................... problems of an economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian .................................................................................................................. character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion".
 Problems arising from the maintenance of peace and security and those of a humanitarian character, particularly after the cold war, have led the Organization to extend its operations to the four corners of the Earth.
 Some observers even fear that development activities will be neglected so long as urgent and immediate needs monopolize the Organization.
 In Burundi, we consider that development, and the related problems and needs, must also be one of the priorities of the United Nations.
 There can be no better place than the General Assembly to deal with problems as global and interconnected as poverty, debt, the environment, development assistance and other equally thorny world-wide issues.
 On the matter of combating poverty and other social problems, Burundi places great hope in the upcoming World Summit for Social Development, where it intends to be represented at the appropriate level.
 Our delegation will spare no effort to ensure that the declaration to be adopted at the Copenhagen Summit will correctly reflect the concerns of poor peoples.
 Many strategies have been adopted to resolve the problem.
 Specific actions have been taken by creditors to restructure commercial debt and in some cases to cancel bilateral debt.
 But as the Secretary-General has pointed out, to date, the efforts made to lighten the burden of multilateral debt have been far from satisfactory.
 The subject of multilateral debt should thus also be carefully studied.
 The current situation regarding trade relations is extremely disturbing.
 We are thinking, in particular, of the least developed countries which run the risk of being poor relations within the new World Trade Organization.
 For some years, the international community has been aware of the non-sustainable nature of the development and consumption patterns followed thus far, without concern for the protection of the environment.
 As the Secretary-General emphasizes in "An Agenda for Development", the environment, like peace, the economy, society and democracy, permeates all aspects of development.
 The Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, in June 1992, gave birth to international legal instruments which, if implemented, will ensure a better environment and more harmonious development for the Earth and its inhabitants.
 My country, Burundi, has already signed these instruments, and it will soon ratify them.
 The ideas put forward are quite diverse.
 We earnestly hope that this discussion will lead to a solution that will preserve the effectiveness of the Security Council while allowing the developing countries to have their voices heard within that body.
 If the democratic reforms desired by our peoples are to be lasting and irreversible, there must be support from the international community, for democracy against a backdrop of social crisis, unemployment, or poverty, could prove illusory.
 My country places great hope in the United Nations, which alone can contribute to solving mankind's current problems, such as those of population, the environment, economic and social development and health, particularly at a time when certain countries of the world are shaken by endemic illnesses.
 The international community must pool its efforts to suppress this scourge.
 We also hope that, as this century draws to a close, our Organization will be able to achieve tangible results, particularly in removing the spectres of hunger, poverty and war.
 We all aspire to peace, justice and freedom.
 In our endeavours, we must succeed in achieving them, in order to give future generations the opportunity to live in a better world.
 May I remind representatives that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and 5 minutes for the second, and should be made by delegations from their seats.
 Mr. Yassin (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): The fact that some delegations have voiced concern over the continuing conflict in the south of Sudan and the suffering of our citizens makes it necessary for us to reply.
 This problem which was engineered and buried in our soil by colonialism has been a time bomb and a thorn in the side of Sudan since before its independence.
 I should add that the present Government, since it came into power in June 1989, has accorded the highest priority to this problem.
 As early as September 1989, it organized a national peace conference on the issues of peace.
 The conference made it clear that this was a political problem that arose from discrepancies between the levels of development in different parts of the country.
 Not content with this, the Government negotiated with the rebels in Addis Ababa in August 1989, and in Nairobi in November 1989.
 It then held two rounds of talks in Abuja.
 It introduced a federalist system wherein the country was divided into 26 states, 10 of which are in the south.
 The Government established "peace villages" and initiated development projects in the southern states wherein it set up local governments.
 Those returnees worked for the local development projects in education, agriculture, and other fields.
 In pursuing the negotiating process which it regarded as the best means for the achievement of a peaceful and just settlement to the problem, the Government requested the Intergovernmental Authority for Drought and Development (IGADD) to ensure continued participation by parties in the negotiations.
 As an earnest indication of the Government's desire for peace, it suggested the setting up of a more practical mechanism that would ensure continued negotiation in the context of shuttle diplomacy.
 They have resorted to procrastination, evasion and procedural tactics with the aim of stalling negotiations.
 Their human rights violations, the kidnapping and conscription of children and killing of relief workers are proof positive that they bear the primary responsibility for the lack of progress in the negotiations.
 The Ambassador of Sudan, when he presented his credentials to the President of Zambia last week, heard from the President positive remarks concerning Sudan and expressions of keen interest in relations between Sudan and Zambia.
 It is regrettable that the Foreign Minister's statement echoed the baseless propaganda campaign waged against my Government.
 Moreover, this Rapporteur has made himself a self-appointed party to the internal politics of Sudan by participating in all the activities of the opposition in Sudan.
 This deprives him of impartiality required in an international civil servant who acts on behalf of the international community.
 Sudan reaffirms that the refusal to delete the paragraphs attacking Islam will prevent Sudan from cooperating with this Rapporteur.
 The Secretary-General: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to speak to the Assembly about the financial situation of the Organization.
 Many Member States have addressed this issue during the general debate - often in candid terms.
 It has been said that the capacity of the United Nations to respond to the demands made on it for peace-keeping depends on the willingness of Member States to contribute the resources needed to fulfil such a role.
 And even more directly, it has been pointed out that the United Nations works wonders with what Member States do not pay it, but it simply cannot keep running on exhausted credit.
 At the end of August 1994, the Organization had debts exceeding $1.7 billion.
 This amount includes about $1 billion owed to some 70 Member States for their troop and equipment contributions to peace-keeping missions.
 In addition, the Organization requires some $400 million each month to meet the costs of regular budget and peace-keeping operations.
 Against these overwhelming financial demands, on 31 August of this year the United Nations had $375 million in cash balances.
 In my letter of 21 July of this year to the former President of the General Assembly, I drew attention to the grave situation we face in cash accounts of peace-keeping operations.
 I outlined a number of emergency measures.
 While a number of Member States responded positively, the problems continue.
 The causes of our precarious financial situation are clear.
 By the end of August, only 56 Member States had paid their regular budget assessment in full, while 70 Member States had made no payment towards their 1994 regular budget assessment.
 By the end of September, 62 Member States still had made no payment.
 The second cause lies in the process of approving peace-keeping budgets and appropriations.
 Following Security Council approval, detailed budgets for the missions have to be prepared and approved before the required amounts can be assessed.
 In other words, lateness and delay create an imbalance in the cash position of the Organization.
 The inflow of cash is far less than the Organization needs to meet its obligations.
 Because of these late and delayed payments, the Organization has had to delay, in turn, its own payments to Member States.
 This is not a satisfactory state of affairs.
 This has ameliorated the situation.
 Some payments to troop- and equipment-contributing Member States have been made possible.
 Cash inflow from Member States has been followed by cash outflow to reimburse Member States.
 Thus, the situation was eased temporarily but not resolved.
 The Organization's liabilities still far exceed its available cash, and therefore the financial situation continues to be precarious.
 The problem is not only the Member States' late or delayed payments; there is a more fundamental problem.
 The Organization has extremely limited cash reserves.
 The Working Capital Fund, less than one month's requirement of the regular budget, is today virtually depleted.
 And at present, there is practically no cash in the peace-keeping reserve fund.
 The Organization simply cannot operate effectively under these constraints.
 Therefore I ask Members to consider not only the problems caused by late and delayed payments but also the fundamental problem of insufficient reserves.
 I ask that Members urgently consider these issues.
 There is another important element in the Organization's financial structure: the method of assessment.
 Over the years, Member States have endorsed three basic concepts regarding the Organization's expenses.
 One concept is "capacity to pay".
 Each Member State should seriously consider whether the present scale of assessments is equitable.
 From this review, adjustments to the existing arrangements could emerge.
 It is important that Member States view the arrangements for sharing the Organization's expenses as fair.
 In my report on the work of the Organization (A/49/1), I stressed the urgent need to overcome the critical financial situation of the United Nations.
 The ability of the United Nations to perform the functions for which it was created is in danger.
 This is no longer simply a financial question; it is an urgent political question.
 The ideas which I have described are outlined in greater detail in a document being distributed to delegations as I speak.
 I offer them as a contribution to the solution of this vital issue.
 These questions require consideration at the highest political level.
 It is important that the General Assembly address them directly and effectively this year.
 I stand ready, Mr. President, to provide any additional information or assistance you may require on this important subject.
 I have asked the Under-Secretary-General for Administration and Management to be at your disposal for that purpose.
 I have every confidence that, under your guidance, the General Assembly will respond.
 I am sure that together we can summon the vision and the will to solve these urgent problems.
 At this point in the history of the United Nations, when its potential is greater than ever before, we can do no less than give it the means to realize that potential. The President (interpretation from French): I thank the Secretary-General for the important statement he has just made.
 I assure members that I am fully available to work closely with all delegations towards success in the work of this session.
 Without fear of error we can already say that the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly will be an exceptional one, given the large number of participants and the high level of the delegations.
 We have had the honour and privilege of hearing statements by one monarch, 31 presidents, 14 heads of Government, two crown princes, 120 ministers and 11 heads of delegation; they eloquently expressed their countries' perceptions of the world situation today.
 Having studied the statements made in the general debate, I wish to make the following comments.
 First, I note that the international community in general feels frustrated by unkept promises about building a post-cold-war world of global peace and security.
 In connection with that concern, I welcome the unanimous recognition in the general debate of the virtues of preventive diplomacy and of the need for the financial and military means to carry out effective peace-keeping operations.
 The universal interest of speakers in this matter confirms the validity of the Secretary-General's "Agenda for Peace" - if such confirmation were necessary.
 Secondly, I note with satisfaction that economic and social development held a central place in the majority of statements.
 In that connection, the Secretary-General's proposed Agenda for Development was rightly seen as an indispensable complement to "An Agenda for Peace", for political instability and civil strife often have their roots in poverty and socio-economic inequality.
 There was particular emphasis on the need quickly to devise practical machinery for the implementation of the Agenda for Development through action-oriented programmes.
 Furthermore, it was reassuring to note that the international community continues to accord the same priority to Africa, as there is still sustained interest in the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s.
 In that connection, the working group on a diversification fund should be reactivated so that it can continue work towards the speedy establishment of such a fund, the importance of which is universally recognized.
 Thirdly, I want to highlight the very timely remarks made by many speakers about reform of the United Nations system.
 Above all, I noted that interest was focused on the enlargement of the Security Council through expansion of its permanent and non-permanent membership.
 Though such a development would seem inevitable, the diversity and complexity of the solutions put forward make a decision on this question difficult for the time being.
 In any event, the Assembly's debate on this item in coming days should clarify the details of the various perceptions of this matter.
 I have no doubt that these efforts will yield results acceptable to all.
 Turning to my last, but not least, comment, I would recall the interest taken throughout the general debate in the financial situation of the United Nations.
 Moreover, we have just heard the important statement by the Secretary-General describing all aspects of this issue.
 Faced with the increase in what the United Nations has to do, particularly in peace-keeping operations and humanitarian assistance, the available financial resources today are inadequate.
 I think this is a very important point and one that should be studied with the tranquillity and lucidity that the situation requires.
 The President (interpretation from French): This morning the Assembly will first turn to the report (A/49/4) of the International Court of Justice covering the period 1 August 1993 to 31 July 1994.
 The President (interpretation from French): I call upon Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui, President of the International Court of Justice.
 His small village in the north-eastern corner of Ce d'Ivoire must surely feel great pride, but so too does another village, the global village that our world has become and whose members are assembled here in other words, the representatives of the United Nations.
 I find this privileged contact between the General Assembly and the Court extremely significant on at least two scores.
 A new case was brought in May of this year and concerns the land and maritime boundary between Cameroon and Nigeria.
 This is an important matter for the parties, and its submission to the Court bears new witness to the faith of the African continent in international justice.
 There is one request for an advisory opinion on the Court's General List at the moment; it deals with a request made in September 1993 by the World Health Organization concerning the legality of the use by a State of nuclear weapons in armed conflict.
 That request, which, as may be imagined, raises some serious issues, has prompted much concern in the international community, judging by the unusual number of States 40 or so that have submitted written statements to us.
 In addition, the Court's jurisdiction has been further extended.
 These signs, encouraging as they are, must not be allowed to give us a false impression.
 A quick comparison with the Court's predecessor the Permanent Court of International Justice would, moreover, prove somewhat disappointing if confined to the quantitative aspects I have mentioned.
 It may, for instance, be noted that, of the 48 States parties to the Statute of the Court in January 1939, 36 had made a declaration of acceptance of the Court's compulsory jurisdiction.
 Beyond specific possible explanations of these phenomena, it must be admitted that they look singularly paradoxical in view of the role that each of these Courts was required to play in its distinctive juridical and institutional context.
 Unfortunately, this has not been the case.
 The fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations, to be celebrated next year, and that of the Court the following year will no doubt provide suitable occasions for stocktaking and for comprehensive and detailed reflection on this paradox.
 As such, the Court is clearly an essential part, not just of the machinery set up by the Charter for the peaceful settlement of disputes, but also of the general system for the maintenance of international peace and security that it introduced.
 Relations between principal organs are, generally speaking, governed by the principles of speciality, equality, the power of each to determine its own jurisdiction, and coordination.
 It suffices, in principle, for two requirements to be met if the Court is to decide a contentious case.
 In reality, when the Court has been seized of legal issues arising in the wider setting of an eminently political dispute it has never, for that reason, refused to deal with the case not even in the event of the use of armed force.
 On the contrary, its jurisprudence clearly points to the decisive contribution that it has made on various occasions to the maintenance or restoration of peace between the parties.
 That Order, which was read out in a public sitting on the very day after the Chamber had heard the Parties, at a time when serious incidents had just broken out between their respective armed forces, can serve as an example in many respects.
 I shall merely note that the Order, which enjoined both Parties strictly to observe the cease-fire, was acted upon while negotiations were still under way in other, essentially regional settings.
 To take a more recent example, I would also refer at this juncture to the Judgment delivered by the Court on 3 February 1994 in the case concerning the Territorial Dispute between Libya and Chad.
 That Judgment put an end to a conflict which, for over 20 years and despite many unavailing attempts to achieve a political settlement, had seriously threatened peace in the region.
 It suffices, for that purpose, that States refer their disputes to it, thus enabling it to play its rightful role to the full.
 There is no case with a legal dimension which lies a priori outside the Court's sphere of competence.
 Some States may perhaps tend to have misgivings about such judicial settlement on the grounds that, unlike a political settlement, it would be completely outside their control and hence, given the reputed rigidity of legal rules, always liable in the end to turn out less favourably to themselves.
 I think I can safely say here that such fears are largely groundless.
 The Court, by the nature of the law it applies, by the role it fulfils and by its composition, is better able than any other judicial institution to withstand blind applications of the law.
 While being sufficiently precise to offer those who come before it all the legal security to which they legitimately aspire, international law remains at the same time and in essence a flexible and open law.
 As a body integrated into the system for the maintenance of peace that was established under the Charter, the Court never loses sight of that ultimate objective.
 The Court is made up of equal, independent and impartial judges; there is no right of veto and no political patronage at the Court.
 The Court takes its decisions on the basis of law, following a most minute and meticulous examination of each case, without failing to take account of the meta-juridical factors, the expectations of the Parties and the imperative requirements of justice and peace.
 There can be no doubt, of course, that each method of peaceful settlement has its distinctive virtues, not only from an intrinsic point of view but also in the light of each particular situation.
 Accordingly, while the Charter makes it obligatory for States to settle their differences by peaceful means, it refrains from laying down a specific mode of settlement.
 That being so, it could clearly be no part of my intention to advocate the substitution of judicial settlement for any other course of action, but only to remove certain ambiguities surrounding it.
 The considerations I have just advanced with essential reference to the contentious procedure before the Court apply, mutatis mutandis, to the advisory procedure, the importance of which has long been underestimated.
 A relevant legal question put in a timely manner to the Court may, by the answer it elicits or indeed of itself, to prove to be an effective tool of preventive diplomacy or contribute, even substantially, to the settlement of a dispute that has already arisen.
 Many an Advisory Opinion has in the past had diplomatic and political implications that were by no means inconsiderable.
 By way of example, one has only to recall the advisory opinion revolutionary in the legal context of the time that the Court handed down in 1949 on the objective international personality of the United Nations and its capacity to ask for reparations.
 As I see it, the essential thing for the Court's immediate future is therefore an affirmation, in seats of government, of the political will to take a fresh and more realistic look at the Court.
 That, it seems to me, is the very modest price that has to be paid if the Court is to resume the place in world affairs that the framers of the Charter originally intended it to occupy.
 One such criticism is the purported slowness of the Court's proceedings.
 In fact, once the Court begins its deliberations, things generally move very fast: it is usually only a few months, or even weeks, between the end of oral proceedings and the rendering of the Court's Judgment.
 The Assembly will certainly recall the speed with which the Court responded to the Assembly's request for an advisory opinion concerning the applicability of the obligation to arbitrate under section 21 of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement of 26 June 1947.
 The public hearings on that case ended on 12 April 1988, and the Court's advisory opinion, a rather long and complex one, was rendered just 14 days later, on 26 April.
 As a prerequisite of the sound administration of justice, expeditiousness is therefore dependent essentially on the will, not of the Court, but of those resorting to it.
 For the States Members of the United Nations that contribute to its budget, access to the Court is free of charge.
 The cornerstone of any judicial proceedings is the cardinal principle of equality of the parties, and this principle underlies all the procedural provisions of the Court's Statute and Rules.
 None the less, we all understand that this formal equality, crucial though it is, does not suffice to allay the misgivings of the least-privileged States.
 For this reason I must pay tribute to the Secretary-General for his noteworthy initiative resulting in the establishment of a special trust fund in 1989 designed to help those States that cannot afford the expense of referring a dispute to the International Court of Justice for settlement.
 May the generous contributors to the fund be warmly thanked in the name of international justice.
 I invite all those able to do so to join them, in the same spirit, in order to increase the fund's resources.
 I also invite all those in need of assistance from the fund to take full advantage of its resources.
 Such a system of judicial cooperative action would, if confirmed and extended, be an unquestionable sign of great maturity on the part of the community of States.
 In recent years international relations have been marked by upheavals as numerous and significant as they have been unexpected.
 If the United Nations wishes to continue the successful pursuit of its noble and difficult mission, it is essential that it show itself to be capable of adapting swiftly and effectively to new circumstances.
 Various ideas have already been advanced in this respect.
 States, traditionally qualified as primary or necessary subjects of the international legal order, which are today the only entities with access to the Court's contentious jurisdiction, are no longer the only actors in international relations or the only interlocutors on matters of peace-keeping, as they were in the 1920s.
 International affairs show us every day that greater allowance also has to be made at this level for other entities.
 These are all questions of great importance for the future of the Court and for world peace.
 They need to be examined very closely in the near future, and I hope to be able to speak to the General Assembly about them again some day.
 The President (interpretation from French): I thank the President of the International Court of Justice.
 Before making specific comments on the report, I wish to discharge the pleasant duty of paying a well-deserved tribute to the President of the International Court of Justice, Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui, and praise his great professional, moral and human qualities.
 In his characteristically clear and eloquent statement, Mr. Bedjaoui just informed us of the increasing activities of the Court.
 In that respect, it would be highly desirable to see the provisions of Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter systematically applied; these provisions, I would recall, provide that:
 In making recommendations under this Article the Security Council should also take into consideration that legal disputes should as a general rule be referred by the parties to the International Court of Justice ....
 The relevance of such an approach is illustrated most graphically in the Court's report of the Judgment in the case Territorial Dispute between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Chad, two fraternal African countries.
 This is all the more regrettable, since the legal framework exists as much for certain primary organs of the United Nations as for certain other international organizations, which are entitled to request advisory opinions of the Court on legal questions.
 Indeed, the potentially substantial input of the Court should be neither neglected nor underestimated.
 The same goes for requests for advisory opinions which the organs entitled to do so might more frequently seek.
 This would apply most particularly, but not exclusively, to Security Council decisions, whose legal foundations and motivations would be clearer to all States Members of the Organization.
 This could only result in a stricter and sounder application of the provisions of Article 24.
 To promote means and methods for the peaceful settlement of disputes between States, including resort to and full respect for the International Court of Justice (resolution 48/30, second preambular paragraph, (b)).
 The Algerian delegation assures the President of the Court and his distinguished colleagues in this Hall of its full support on both scores.
 Mr. Flores Olea (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): We wish to express our heartfelt thanks to Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui for his excellent presentation today to the General Assembly of the report on the work of the International Court of Justice.
 We should like to express particular appreciation for the format and the calibre of his report this morning.
 The fact that he shared with the General Assembly his evaluation and analysis of the all-important work of the Court and commented on the Court's recommendations and proposals cannot but greatly enrich the work of this session.
 Their contributions to the Court and to the development of international law helped enhance the stature of the highest international judicial organ.
 Unfortunately, international law is not in and of itself a guarantee of peace; it must be accompanied by the political will of States to pledge themselves to use the mechanisms and to adhere to the norms that the law provides for avoiding or resolving conflicts.
 Such a declaration by other Members of the United Nations, and especially those that have major responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, is highly desirable; that would make clearer their confidence in and respect for the Court.
 This undoubtedly can have an impact on United Nations Members' perception of the Court, and it can contribute to broadening communication and cooperation between the principal organs of the United Nations.
 Abiding by the law and applying it are, as we are all aware, essential elements in present-day international relations.
 Mr. Azwai (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): My country's delegation would like to associate itself with other delegations in welcoming Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui, President of the International Court of Justice, and in congratulating him on his detailed introduction of the report of the Court to this session.
 Many States have chosen to have recourse to the Court to settle their differences and disputes and have accepted and implemented the Court's rulings.
 My country is one such State.
 Over the last three decades, the Court has considered three cases to which the Jamahiriya was a party.
 This position was appreciated by the Secretary-General, as stated in his report (S/1994/672), and also by the Security Council, as contained in its resolution 926 (1994).
 We all have welcomed the easing of tensions in international relations.
 The coming period will witness attempts by the international community to build a new world order.
 If this order is to become permanent and fair, it should be based, in the view of my country, on the rule of law and respect for international law.
 Those States, whenever they are parties to disputes, must demonstrate their commitment to international law and respect of its rules by accepting and implementing the Court's rulings.
 Indeed, some of those States still refuse to have recourse to the Court or to implement its rulings.
 The Secretary-General, in his report entitled An Agenda for Peace, states that greater reliance on the International Court of Justice would be an important contribution to United Nations peacemaking.
 My country agrees with this assessment and believes that this trend should be strengthened and enhanced.
 It also believes that States should be encouraged to have recourse to the Court and to make use of its potential to settle their disputes before taking them to other United Nations organs such as the Security Council, as has happened in some cases.
 One example is the dispute between my country and France, Britain and the United States of America which the Jamahiriya has referred to the International Court of Justice.
 Although the dispute is still before the Court, the three States resorted to the Security Council and pushed it to adopt certain resolutions pertaining to the dispute without even waiting for the Court's decision.
 This is exactly what we do not want.
 The President (interpretation from French): I should like to remind Member States that the deadline for submission, in writing, of their views on Programme 6 of the medium-term plan, Elimination of apartheid, contained in document A/49/6, Programme 6, is Wednesday, 26 October.
 This will allow sufficient time for transmission to the Fifth Committee.
 My delegation welcomes the decision that the Working Group should continue its work during this session and submit a report to the General Assembly before the end of the session.
 We look forward, Mr. President, to continuing our participation in the deliberations of the Working Group under your able stewardship.
 Malaysia's views on this item have already been articulated: at the last General Assembly session, at meetings of the Open-ended Working Group, and recently by our Deputy Prime Minister in his address on 5 October during the general debate.
 Given the importance of this issue, we feel, however, that it is necessary today to reiterate some of the points raised earlier by our delegation.
 We should not allow any unpersuasive claims by some major Powers and others to stand in the way of timely and necessary change, change that would make the Security Council more representative, effective, transparent, democratic and accountable.
 A reformed Security Council should serve the interests of all nations in the maintenance of international peace and security.
 My delegation is convinced that a mere change in the composition of the Security Council would not be sufficient to ensure broad support for Council decisions without specific changes in the Council's working methods.
 We have repeatedly said that expansion without reform of the Council's working methods would be meaningless and undeserving of the interest of the entire membership of the United Nations.
 On the other hand, reform of the Council, even without expansion, would have some positive effect on the effectiveness, credibility and legitimacy of the Security Council.
 Any reform which merely facilitates enlargement, specifically through the increase of permanent membership by one or two or even three seats, to the exclusion of other equally important issues is certainly not acceptable to us.
 My delegation is not convinced that merely adding two or more permanent members to cushion the financial obligations of some veto-wielding Powers would really reform the Security Council.
 Furthermore, we have always questioned the permanent status of some members of the Security Council, which is not consistent with the principles of the sovereign equality of States and democracy.
 From the discussions in the Open-ended Working Group it is clear that there is a wide convergence of views over the need to improve the working methods and procedures of the Security Council in order to enhance its efficiency.
 While recognizing that there have been some positive steps towards that end, my delegation is of the view that more could, and indeed should, be done by the Security Council.
 Decisions of the General Assembly must be made binding on the Council, particularly those commanding overwhelming support.
 For instance, in the case of peace-keeping operations, the Council, which takes decisions on peace-keeping matters, must create institutional mechanisms for consultation with the troop contributors.
 On the question of enlargement of the Security Council's membership, we agree that the increase should be large enough to represent all 184 Members effectively.
 Since the Security Council derives its moral legitimacy from its balanced representative character, it is necessary that its future composition be reflective of the current realities.
 My delegation is prepared to consider the various models of ratio increase proposed by some delegations with a view to finding a workable and acceptable ratio.
 Any formula that would ensure the greatest degree of representation and equity should be acceptable to us.
 This is necessary and timely in the light of the current realities and in keeping with the significant increase in the membership of the United Nations to 184.
 It is the view of my delegation that regional representation should not be on the basis of the biggest and the most powerful in a given region, but, more importantly, on the basis of the dynamics operating in the region and the arrangements developed there.
 If regional organizations provide the interlocking network for globalism, clearly the permanent interests of regions must be given pre-eminence.
 My delegation has always questioned the continuing relevance of the veto in the light of some unhealthy trends in the Security Council, where only one Power or group of Powers increasingly appears to be taking control of decision-making.
 First, the victorious Powers of 1945, which accorded themselves special privileges as permanent members, are no longer the exclusive pre-eminent Powers, as new centres of power have since emerged.
 Therefore, in our view, the veto is obsolete in the context of current realities.
 Thirdly, the veto undermines the concept of collective security of States as enshrined in the Charter.
 As we indicated in our submission to the Secretary-General,
 Fourthly, the veto power allows the permanent members to protect or shield any States they desire from the governance of the Security Council.
 Fifthly, the threat of the use of the veto is often used even to prevent or delay a request for debate intended to allow the general membership to make its pronouncements on critical issues relating to international peace and security.
 Finally, the veto marginalizes the role of the non-permanent members.
 Mr. Yassin (Sudan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 My delegation is fully aware that no permanent member will at present accept a Charter amendment that results in the abolition of the veto power.
 The details of our proposal will be raised when the Working Group convenes.
 In their statements during the general debate most delegations, including my own, spoke of the need to reform the Security Council.
 A number of interesting proposals advanced during the general debate merit our serious consideration.
 My delegation will study all those proposals carefully.
 I am confident that under his leadership the Assembly will achieve its objectives.
 In his capacity as Chairman of the Open-ended Working Group established to consider this item by resolution 48/26, Ambassador Insanally brought greater focus and clarity to the issues which have to be addressed before we can arrive at a satisfactory conclusion.
 The item we are considering today, Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and related matters, was introduced 15 years ago at the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly.
 With the end of the cold war, the Security Council began to achieve much of its envisaged role in the maintenance of international peace and security.
 The purpose of the Singapore statement was to stimulate discussions on this important issue with a view to making progress.
 As stated by my Foreign Minister:
 We are pleased that the process of debate and discussion has since taken off.
 Progress has been made in the Open-ended Working Group as delegations have begun to conduct substantive discussions of the issues.
 However, for a consensus to emerge more needs to be done.
 This is especially so if, as some representatives have advocated, we are to achieve consensus before the end of the fiftieth session.
 First, the issues of an increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Security Council must become priority issues for Governments.
 Unless capitals become seized of these issues and have clear visions of the role of the United Nations in the next 50 years, we will not achieve much here in New York.
 Secondly, the implications of those specific proposals thrown out during the discussions in the Open-ended Working Group and in the recently concluded general debate must be critically examined.
 They claim that eventually political considerations will determine who the new permanent members will be.
 Others have asked: what should constitute such objective criteria? We have no doubt that in the final analysis political considerations will play a part in our decisions.
 However, we will still need to have objective criteria to guide our political decisions.
 As to what should constitute objective criteria, we need only look at the role of the Security Council as defined in the United Nations Charter to answer this question.
 Progress on this item will be hesitant at best unless there is political will to push ahead.
 We cannot achieve consensus in the Working Group unless there is a genuine desire on the part of Member States to negotiate seriously and to make the necessary compromises.
 But we should also deliberate carefully, because the decisions taken on this important issue will have a profound impact on the ability of the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole to maintain international peace and security in the decades ahead.
 My delegation will do its utmost to make constructive contributions to the process of consensus-building on this important item.
 Mr. Hurst (Antigua and Barbuda): This is the first time I have had the opportunity to address the Assembly since Mr. Amara Essy was elected President; let me therefore congratulate him warmly on behalf of the Antigua and Barbuda delegation.
 My delegation is confident that under his able stewardship the Assembly will succeed in advancing the noble aims and objectives of the Charter.
 My delegation regards as established wisdom the view that Security Council decision-making will be the most significant factor in fashioning a new world order in the post-cold-war world.
 As a small State, Antigua and Barbuda regards adherence to international law as a cardinal rule from which no State should ever deviate; given their relative inability to defend themselves militarily, small States must depend on the strictures of international law to deter external aggression.
 In this context, equity means that decision-making within the Security Council must take into account the views of small States.
 Such a debate excludes the principle of equity for all nations, large and small.
 That approach harks back to the days of colonial rule in Antigua and Barbuda when the privilege of offering oneself as a candidate for parliament was limited to those who possessed valuable property; that inequity was outlawed in 1951 in my small country when adult suffrage became the law.
 There is an urgent need for large and wealthy States to engage in meaningful dialogue with small and poor States in the Councils of this parliament of parliaments.
 Small and poor States will not depend upon goodwill; the United Nations Charter obliges Member States to sit in counsel with those reliant upon the Council's decision-making powers.
 That is a charge we shall never surrender.
 This arrangement, in our view, encompasses equity for all nations, large and small.
 Our ambition, as our Prime Minister has declared, is after all to democratize the Security Council.
 Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Indonesia's position on the question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council was clearly stated by our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ali Alatas, during the general debate earlier this month.
 Our commendations also go to the two Vice-Chairmen, Ambassador Wilhelm Breitenstein of Finland and Ambassador Chew Tai Soo of Singapore.
 Recent developments in the global landscape have placed the Security Council in a position of increasing importance with ramifications for the work of the Organization and beyond.
 The new cooperative spirit prevailing among its members has allowed them to take a number of unanimous positions on some of the most critical and complex issues, while we are also cognizant of the fact that it has failed to address effectively certain other issues.
 The Council has thus reached a critical turning-point in its history and members look forward to a more effective role now that the obstacles which paralysed it for so long have been removed.
 It is pertinent to recall that endeavours to achieve this objective initiated a decade and a half ago have lagged behind and somehow remained beyond the purview of a broad and far-reaching process of reform and revitalization of the United Nations itself.
 In 1946, the United Nations had 51 Members, six of which were non-permanent members of the Security Council.
 In 1965, when the membership had grown to 113, there was a corresponding increase in the non-permanent members to 10.
 The tenth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Jakarta in September 1992, expressed the position of the Movement on the question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council as contained in the Final Documents, issued as document A/47/675 of 18 November 1992.
 They expressed their concern that non-aligned countries were extremely under-represented in the Council and underlined that the proposed enlargement should, therefore, be comprehensive in nature so as to enhance the credibility of the Council and to reflect the universal character of the world body.
 In this context, the Ministers recalled the relevant decisions of the Jakarta Summit and urged that the non-aligned countries should work towards increasing their representation in the Security Council.
 To conclude, I wish to state that the non-aligned countries deem it essential for the Open-ended Working Group to continue its work in order to fulfil its mandate as contained in General Assembly resolution 48/26.
 We therefore support its recommendation, as indicated in paragraph 9 of its report, that it continue its work at the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
 However, the report does not indicate the full range of the views expressed, and this in our view is a great pity.
 In a sense, given the far-reaching import of the issues involved, it may not be surprising that consensus remained elusive on the major issues.
 We therefore welcome the fact that the Open-ended Working Group will continue to develop its work, taking into account the views that have already been expressed at the forty-eighth session.
 As my delegation has already stated in the meetings of the Working Group, two major categories of proposals and suggestions emanated from the dialogues during the last session.
 We feel that many of the enlightened measures taken by the Council should be considered part of its regular working methods rather than as a reflection of the initiative or working style of individual Member States that presided over it.
 Sri Lanka is well aware that the Security Council still works on the basis of provisional rules of procedure and that formally setting down the recent reforms and institutionalizing them may not be easy.
 We would, however, have welcomed at least a statement from the Security Council noting and blessing, if you will the changes that have been welcomed by all members.
 We hope that the process will continue and that these changes will become a matter of course.
 Secondly, there are those proposals relating to the increase in the membership of the Council that require amendment of the Charter.
 That the Council should increase its membership has been universally accepted.
 There are divergent views on the extent of the increase.
 Sri Lanka's own position has been that new realities political, military, economic as well as other factors which characterize the international scene today call for an adjustment in respect of the permanent members of the Council.
 A number of countries have been mentioned, discussed and advocated as qualifying for permanent membership in the Council in terms of the new international realities.
 Some of the arguments advanced in favour of those other countries are at least as cogent today as were the arguments considered valid when the present five permanent members were determined.
 The ultimate criterion should be the acceptability of a Member before the general membership.
 The standardization of these so-called soft options should not in any way imply that the more radical changes necessitating Charter amendment should be set aside or delayed.
 It is important to pursue action on both.
 However, where agreement is possible on the soft options, they should not be held hostage until such time as agreement has been reached on the more difficult, and indeed more vital, areas of Security Council reform which require amendment of the Charter.
 Sri Lanka looks forward to participating, under the President's guidance, in the Working Group this year during the forty-ninth session.
 We sincerely hope that it would then be possible to reach more definite agreement, which would make the Security Council more effective and more responsive to the general membership of the United Nations.
 This is essential at a time when the Organization is faced with new challenges.
 Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines): At the outset, my delegation wishes to congratulate Ambassador Insanally, Chairman of the Open-ended Working Group, and the two Vice-Chairmen, the Permanent Representatives of Singapore and Finland, for having effectively guided the Working Group in its initial rounds of deliberations.
 The Philippine delegation believes the time has come for Member States to undertake a more detailed examination of the various issues relating to the expansion and reform of the Security Council.
 In this regard, delegations should be prepared to offer and consider specific proposals by the time the Open-ended Working Group reconvenes we hope by early next year.
 Our fundamental view is that any enlargement of the Security Council should be firmly based on the principle of the sovereign equality of States, equitable geographical distribution and the need to create greater transparency, accountability and democratization.
 Furthermore, we believe the effectiveness and efficiency of an enlarged Council would not necessarily be inversely related to its size.
 In fact, wider membership would lead to a more democratic decision-making process and, ultimately, to more active support for decisions, as well as participation in operations arising from such decisions.
 Failure to address this situation meaningfully would tend to undermine the credibility of the Council and the universal character of United Nations decision-making.
 In connection with the last point, it should be stressed that the criteria for non-permanent members are already specified in Article 23(1) of the Charter.
 The Working Group should therefore decide on an appropriate arrangement for considering them simultaneously or as a package when necessary, bearing in mind the need for full transparency.
 The related matters to which this agenda item on the Security Council refers are an equally important aspect of the item.
 The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has also proposed a set of measures on the other matters contained in its Cairo Declaration, which was adopted last June.
 Member States should advance the work on the other matters by building upon and refining the various measures already proposed or the proposals circulated in the Working Group, which the Security Council could undertake in addition to those it has recently instituted.
 To facilitate this task, we reiterate our support for the establishment by the Open-ended Working Group of an informal drafting body to consider all proposals made in connection with improving the Council's decision-making processes and procedures.
 My delegation further proposes that the Working Group examine, as a priority, proposals on the other matters in the context of two mutually reinforcing and interrelated categories of measures.
 The Philippine delegation hopes to contribute towards significant progress on this agenda item during the current session.
 We believe, however, that, in terms of the pace of work, both the expansion issues and the other matters although these are obviously interrelated and mutually reinforcing need not be strictly linked.
 Ultimately, we believe, progress in one area would contribute to progress in others.
 Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): We have come a long way since we discussed the agenda item Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council a year ago at the General Assembly's forty-eighth session.
 We have now arrived at a point where the general exchange of views has run its course and an in-depth discussion of concrete reform proposals must begin.
 Statements made during the general debate of the forty-ninth session confirm this view.
 With regard to substance, the past year's discussion has brought about growing consensus among Member States on the central point with regard to this exercise that the Security Council shall be enlarged.
 First, all world regions should be equitably represented on the Security Council.
 Fourthly, the Security Council's work must be carried out in an open and transparent manner to enable non-members to receive all the information they require.
 Also, all Member States should have a better opportunity to provide input for the Council's work.
 We therefore support an increase in the permanent and non-permanent membership of the Security Council to allow both a better representation of the regions that are currently underrepresented and a more adequate representation of countries which shoulder a large share of the United Nations overall burden.
 Should agreement not be possible now with regard to permanent seats for countries from the regions of Africa, Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean, the following alternative could be considered.
 At the same time, the number of non-permanent seats ought to be increased in favour of these regions.
 As a consequence, countries with the ability and willingness to contribute more than the average to United Nations activities and the maintenance of international peace and security could serve on the Council on a more frequent or even continuous basis.
 In addition, such a proposal would widen the gap between permanent and non-permanent members.
 In the League of Nations, a system of several classes did not work.
 We cannot support such proposals.
 What is needed is not greater division but more homogeneity among the members of the Council.
 We are pleased that a broad consensus on the need for a more open and transparent Security Council appears to have emerged.
 As a matter of fact, many steps have been taken already by the Security Council itself to provide Member States not currently represented on the Council with better access to information about the Council's proceedings.
 We hope that the improvements made so far will be followed by additional steps to provide the general membership with sufficient information and insight in the Security Council's decision-making, thus allowing Member States to contribute their views and represent their interests vis--vis the Security Council.
 We have been pleased with the progress made to date in the discussion of this agenda item.
 The Security Council's credibility and therefore its effectiveness depend on whether its composition is adapted to the new post-cold-war realities.
 I would also be remiss in not taking this opportunity to commend the able and wise leadership of his predecessor, Ambassador Insanally, the Permanent Representative of Guyana, who led the Working Group in a very efficient manner.
 I should also like to praise the sincere and constructive efforts of the members of the Bureau, the representatives of Finland and Singapore.
 This is only natural and was to be expected in view of the rapid pace of changes and developments in the world today.
 Interaction and cohesion are required of the current international order in the face of such changes.
 The contemporary world order has come a long way in laying the foundations of the fundamental concepts and principles of today's international relations.
 Those concepts and principles are irreversible no matter how times and circumstances may change.
 Those new concepts and principles have become acquired rights which all countries and peoples cherish.
 International developments require us to review, periodically and sometimes comprehensively, certain aspects of the international order so that it may not become dated and outstripped by events.
 We should make sure that the international order truly reflects current international realities.
 One of the most important sources of commitment to the Security Council's resolutions is the collective international will we know by the name of international legality.
 This the elementary simple idea that lies behind the new international order is exactly what we should enhance and reflect in the work of the Council and it should be the ultimate objective in any process of reforming and developing the work of the Council.
 Strengthening the legality, which derives from the Charter, and which imparts to the Security Council's resolutions their legitimacy, requires in the view of my delegation: First, increasing membership of the Council.
 Such increase should accurately reflect the realities of today's world.
 Second, reviewing the Council's decision-making procedures so that the Council, as stipulated in the Charter, may genuinely act on behalf of all Member States.
 Third, the increase should reflect very accurately and honestly the political weight of regional Powers from all regions of the world, and the seats allocated to each geographic region should be rotated among countries which meet the eligibility requirements.
 In this regard, it is important to refer to a number of concrete proposals that were put forward during the general debate and others that have been put forward today, such as those by Egypt, Italy and Australia, among others.
 Those proposals could be discussed further, developed and elaborated.
 In addition, troop-contributing countries to peace-keeping operations should be consulted, in accordance with Article 44 of the Charter.
 Consultations should not be confined to the stage of decision-making, but should, rather, take place at an earlier stage, and continue thereafter, in order to take advantage of the expertise of regional Powers and organizations.
 Some may claim that the veto power is rarely exercised nowadays.
 This may be true, but only in relation to the veto used in voting on draft resolutions.
 As for the threat to use the veto or what is known as the covert veto, this is frequently resorted to during the drafting and formulation of draft resolutions.
 So, the practice is with us and has not stopped.
 No one can be sure that in the future the Organization will not find itself in tense circumstances similar to those that pertained in the past, circumstances that would once again render it unable to perform its functions and shoulder its responsibility.
 In dealing with the question of increasing the membership of the Security Council, it has thus become important to determine the scope of the use of veto power by agreeing on clear criteria for the framework of its use.
 There have been no working papers containing clear, specific ideas that could become a basis for negotiations.
 We should now move from the stage of general statements to a new stage of serious negotiations and open-mindedness in order for the Working Group to achieve tangible progress.
 It is not expected or acceptable that the viewpoint of the minority should be imposed upon the majority.
 The two-thirds majority will not accept anything that runs counter to its vital interests.
 The Egyptian delegation hope that this consensus will continue.
 Mr. Chaturvedi (India): As a Member State which had the privilege of initiating the agenda item on the question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council, India is happy to participate in today's debate.
 Decisions on an issue as important as the structure, composition and functioning of the Security Council cannot be taken except by consensus.
 Wider representation in the Security Council is a must, if it is to ensure its moral sanction and particular effectiveness.
 The number of non-permanent seats must also be increased to give Member States greater opportunity for participation in the work of the Council.
 As the eventual size of the Council will depend on agreement on the number of members to be added to each category, we remain flexible on this issue.
 We note, however, that in the Working Group there was near consensus on a figure in the middle twenties.
 We would advise against a selective, piecemeal expansion of the permanent member category.
 The laws of the corporate world, where equity shares determine voting power, should not apply to the Security Council, nor should we emulate the Bretton Woods institutions in which wealth determines the strength of the votes.
 In our view, these criteria should include population, size of economy, contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security and to peace-keeping and future potential.
 There may be others, but selection of a country should follow rather than precede the establishment of the criteria.
 The non-aligned Foreign Ministers representing the largest grouping of Member States at the United Nations agreed on this point when they recently declared any predetermined selection excluding the non-aligned and other developing countries unacceptable to the Movement.
 We stand ready to serve in that capacity whenever we are called upon to do so.
 A radical reorganization of the Council, with new categories of members, or new geographical arrangements, will lead to more complications and retard the progress we have achieved so far.
 Such proposals may even require a comprehensive review of the Charter itself.
 The time has come for us to work out an expansion package within the framework that the Charter provides.
 My delegation would equally stress that the reform package we are considering should devote equal attention to expansion as to the improvement of the Council's working methods to enhance transparency.
 The Council should also act in strict conformity with the provisions of the Charter and limit itself to the maintenance of international peace and security and not clutter its agenda with extraneous issues.
 Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): The deliberations by the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council during the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly have constituted an important initial step in the complex process of reforming the Security Council.
 It is no longer a matter of whether or not, but rather of how large and how soon.
 Moreover, by agreeing to discuss further the scope and nature of such an enlargement, the Working Group has recognized that the objectives of the exercise concern not just the quantitative increase, but also the qualitative composition of that important organ.
 Therefore, in its first year of deliberations, the Working Group succeeded in identifying and defining the main parameters of the question: first that the Security Council should be enlarged; and, secondly, that the enlargement should contemplate not only quantitative but also qualitative elements.
 As recommended in the report of the Working Group, Brazil believes that the discussion of agenda item 33 should continue during this forty-ninth session, building on the work done at the forty-eighth session and on the views expressed at the current session.
 In response to this call, my delegation would like to present today some further views on this important issue as a contribution to further deliberations in the Working Group.
 I will not dwell on the question of the need for the enlargement of the Council, since this is already a consensual view.
 What we must address in depth now are the subsequent twin questions of the scope and nature of the enlargement.
 From the deliberations of the Working Group there seems to emerge a general perception that the final determination of the size and composition of a restructured Security Council has to be predicated on three basic qualifications: equitable representation, effectiveness and efficiency.
 Equitable representation stems from the idea that the membership of the Security Council should be adequately increased in order to make it more representative of the membership at large in view of present-day realities in international life.
 A balanced quantitative as well as qualitative expansion of the Council's composition should contemplate the following aspects.
 Effectiveness and efficiency are two other critical qualifications required in the restructuring of the Council in order to improve its role in the discharge of its functions and powers.
 Efficiency derives from the process of the Council taking action promptly, and its effectiveness relates to the Council's taking action that yields the intended results.
 Therefore, due attention should be paid in order not to confuse or equate efficiency and effectiveness.
 A Security Council that expeditiously adopts dozens or more statements and resolutions in succession, the implementation of which remains largely ignored or unfulfilled, may be seen to be efficient, but would not be effective.
 Conversely, a single decision taken by the Council after lengthy and thorough deliberations with the participation of all the relevant parties could be very effective, while not necessarily qualifying as prompt action.
 Another confusion that should be avoided is to automatically correlate the size of the Council with its efficiency.
 Equally, a larger Council could become more effective when it is perceived by the international community as being more equitably composed, and therefore more authoritative in its deliberations and decisions.
 As I mentioned before, the efficiency of the Council is related to its process of decision-making, while its effectiveness is related to the achievement of the desired results in the maintenance of international peace and security.
 All of these are crucial aspects of our endeavours aimed at enhancing the legitimacy and the effectiveness of that main organ.
 Each member of the Council, permanent and non-permanent alike, is therefore accountable to the membership at large of the Organization for its contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security.
 It is our expectation that this practice will be maintained and further improved in the future, with a view to establishing a more wide-ranging dialogue between these two main organs of the Organization.
 While concurring with the pertinent criticism that the reports of the Security Council make for arid reading and could be more analytical, we note that the document in its current format reports only on the official proceedings.
 In this regard, mechanisms could be devised to preserve in some authoritative way the main contents of the informal consultations and to keep the interested public informed.
 We also deem it helpful for the President to attend, whenever appropriate, meetings of the regional groups to brief them on matters of specific interest to them.
 Moreover, we believe that such practice could be further improved by another modality of briefing by the President at the end of his or her term, giving an assessment of the work accomplished by the Council during that President's tenure.
 Similarly, we deem it appropriate that at the end of each informal consultation, the President of the Council, or a member of his or her delegation, give a succinct briefing of the deliberations to interested delegations.
 Alternatively, such a task could be performed by a spokesperson from the Secretariat, specifically designated for that purpose.
 First, there could be more frequent recourse to Article 29 of the Charter, establishing ad hoc subsidiary organs that could assist the Council by performing a monitoring or a mediation role for the peaceful settlement of specific disputes with the participation, as appropriate, of interested non-members.
 Such a mechanism would greatly contribute to re-establishing the pre-eminence of the diplomatic functions of the Council, which we regard as a priority task at this moment.
 Thirdly, there could be more frequent recourse to the highly informal meetings in the so-called Diego Arria format, in order to allow Council members to receive briefings and input on matters before the Council from the different parties to conflicts or from representatives of relevant regional organizations, as appropriate.
 Fourthly, along the same lines, the sanctions committees could consider ways to better enable involuntarily affected Member States to bring to the attention of Council members the problems they face in implementing the sanctions adopted by the Security Council.
 Such a result would be fundamental for ensuring that the future Security Council we envisage will be efficient and effective as well as legitimate and authoritative, and, last but not least, representative.
 The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m. The President (interpretation from French): This morning the General Assembly will consider the first report of the General Committee (A/49/250).
 I shall be referring to specific sections and paragraphs of the report which contain recommendations for consideration by the Assembly.
 We turn first to section I, "Introduction".
 In paragraph 2 of its report, the General Committee draws the attention of the General Assembly to the provisions reproduced in annexes V, VI, VII and VIII of its rules of procedure.
 The President (interpretation from French): In paragraph 3, the General Committee took note of resolution 48/264 of 29 July 1994, entitled "Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly", and of annex I thereto, entitled "Guidelines on the rationalization of the agenda of the General Assembly".
 We shall now consider section II of the report, "Organization of the session".
 The President (interpretation from French): In paragraph 7 of its report, the General Committee took note of the fact that measures introduced to reduce costs relating to overtime would be strictly enforced.
 In section II.C, concerning the closing date of the forty-ninth session, the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that the forty-ninth session should recess not later than Tuesday, 20 December 1994, and close on Monday, 18 September 1995.
 The President (interpretation from French): Also in paragraph 8, the General Committee further recommends to the Assembly that all the Main Committees should make every effort to complete their work by Friday, 2 December 1994.
 In paragraph 9, the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that morning meetings should start at 10 a.m. promptly for all plenary meetings and meetings of the Main Committees.
 The President (interpretation from French): Also in paragraph 9, the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that, as a cost-saving measure, every effort should be made to ensure that plenary meetings and meetings of the Main Committees adjourn by 6 p.m.
 The President (interpretation from French): It should be noted that these measures will not apply to plenary meetings during the general debate.
 The President (interpretation from French): None the less, I should like to endorse strongly the practical suggestion made at previous sessions that each delegation designate someone to be present at the scheduled time.
 I sincerely hope that all delegations will cooperate in this regard.
 It was so decided.
 The President (interpretation from French): In that connection, I should like to assure the Assembly that I shall be in the Chair punctually at the scheduled time.
 I urge the Chairmen of the Main Committees to do the same.
 I sincerely hope that all delegations will make a special effort to cooperate in this regard.
 In section II.E, concerning the general debate, the General Committee recommends in paragraph 12 that the general debate should begin on Monday, 26 September 1994, and end on Thursday, 13 October 1994.
 In paragraph 13 the General Committee draws the Assembly's attention to the decision taken by the Assembly at previous sessions to prohibit the practice of expressing congratulations inside the General Assembly Hall after a speech has been delivered.
 The General Committee recommends that this provision should apply also at the forty-ninth session.
 The President (interpretation from French): Also in paragraph 13, the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that, after delivering their statements, speakers in the general debate should leave the General Assembly Hall through room GA-200, located behind the podium, before returning to their seats.
 May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of the provisions concerning explanations of vote and right of reply contained in paragraph 14?
 The President (interpretation from French): May I further take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to limit points of order to five minutes, as recommended in paragraph 15?
 The President (interpretation from French): May I take it that the Assembly takes note of the provisions contained in paragraph 16 regarding the length of statements?
 The President (interpretation from French): Section II G deals with records of meetings.
 The President (interpretation from French): Section II H concerns concluding statements in the General Assembly and the Main Committees.
 Section II K refers to questions relating to the programme budget.
 The President (interpretation from French): In paragraph 27, concerning subparagraph 13 (d) of decision 34/401, the General Committee draws the Assembly's attention to the Secretary-General's observation that the preparation of a statement of programme budget implications by the Secretary-General may take a few days.
 The Secretary-General thus considers it desirable that Member States submit their proposals regarding the preparation of statements of programme-budget implications sufficiently in advance to avoid the cancellation of meetings and the postponement of consideration of items.
 The President (interpretation from French): May I take it that the Assembly also approves the recommendation contained in paragraph 29 regarding the scheduling of observances and commemorative meetings?
 The President (interpretation from French): I now invite the General Assembly to turn to section II M, which refers to special conferences.
 May I take it that the Assembly approves the recommendations referred to in paragraphs 30 and 31?
 The President (interpretation from French): We turn now to section III, which contains observations and proposals on the organization of future sessions of the General Assembly.
 In paragraph 34 the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that it consider whether it is possible to rationalize its meetings between January and August in order to facilitate advance planning for delegations and the Secretariat.
 The President (interpretation from French): We turn now to section IV of the report of the General Committee, relating to the adoption of the agenda.
 "Debate on the inclusion of an item in the agenda, when that item has been recommended for inclusion by the General Committee, shall be limited to three speakers in favour of, and three against, the inclusion."
 The President (interpretation from French): In paragraph 38 the General Committee recommends that the consideration of item 86 of the draft agenda (Question of East Timor) be deferred to the fiftieth session and that the item be included in the provisional agenda of that session.
 The President (interpretation from French): In paragraph 39 the General Committee recommends that sub-item (c) of item 90 (Report of the International Conference on Population and Development) become a separate agenda item.
 The President (interpretation from French): We now turn to paragraph 41.
 "Human resources management:
 (c) Respect for the privileges and immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations;
 May I take it that the Assembly approves this recommendation?
 The President (interpretation from French): I wish to draw the attention of members to the Summary of Scheduled Meetings in today's Journal.
 That modification applies to all official languages.
 In accordance with past practice, we shall follow the numbering given in paragraph 43 of the General Committee's report (A/49/250) and, where it seems appropriate, we shall consider items in groups.
 Items 1 to 6 have already been dealt with.
 We turn to items 7 to 25.
 I take it that these items are included in the agenda?
 The President (interpretation from French): We come now to item 26.
 May I take it that the item is included in the agenda?
 The President (interpretation from French): I now refer to items 27 to 44.
 I take it that these items are included in the agenda?
 The President (interpretation from French): May I take it that items 45 to 52 are included in the agenda?
 The President (interpretation from French): I now invite members to turn to items 53 to 64 relating to disarmament.
 The President (interpretation from French): May I take it that item 65 is included in the agenda?
 The President (interpretation from French): We now turn to items 66 to 73.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now invite members to turn to items 74 to 86.
 The President (interpretation from French): We now come to items 87 to 92 relating to international economic cooperation.
 The President (interpretation from French): Items 93 to 103 relate to social and humanitarian questions.
 The President (interpretation from French): May I take it that items 104 to 132 dealing with administrative and financial questions are included in the agenda?
 The President (interpretation from French): We now turn to items 133 to 146.
 The President (interpretation from French): Item 147 is entitled "Question of the review of the Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies".
 May I take it that this item is included in the agenda?
 The President (interpretation from French): Item 148 is entitled "The situation in the occupied territories of Croatia".
 Mr. Giovas (Greece): Greece has repeatedly stated its concern on the situation in the territories of Croatia under temporary United Nations protection.
 As a country of the region, both in our national capacity and as a member of the European Union, we have made every possible effort, and will continue to do so, in order to convince the parties involved of the need to achieve a modus vivendi in those areas.
 However, we share the strong reservations expressed during the meeting of the General Committee by some of its members on the title of the item, since it could prove to be inflammatory at a highly sensitive stage of the peace process in the former Yugoslavia.
 We are confident that the Croatian delegation has duly taken note of those reservations and we hope that the deliberations of the General Assembly on this item will be non-confrontational and constructive.
 The President (interpretation from French): The Assembly has taken note of the statement of the representative of Greece.
 May I take it that this item is included in the agenda?
 The President (interpretation from French): We turn now to item 149, entitled "Report of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991".
 May I take it that this item is included in the agenda?
 The President (interpretation from French): Next, we turn to item 150, entitled "Commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War".
 May I take it that the Assembly recommends the inclusion of this item?
 The President (interpretation from French): Item 151 is entitled "Observer status for the South Pacific Forum in the General Assembly".
 May I take it that the Assembly recommends the inclusion of this item?
 The President (interpretation from French): Now we turn to item 152, entitled "Observer status for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in the General Assembly".
 The President (interpretation from French): ............................................................. Item 154 is entitled "United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s".
 The President (interpretation from French): Item 157 is entitled "Question of criteria for the granting of observer status in the General Assembly".
 May I take it that the Assembly decides to include this item?
 The President (interpretation from French):.............................................................. We now turn to section V of the Secretary-General's memorandum (Allocation of items).
 The President (interpretation from French): The modifications indicated in paragraph 45 are reflected in the proposed allocation.
 We shall therefore consider them when we come to the relevant items under paragraph 46.
 We turn first to the recommendation in paragraph 45 (a) (i) relating to item 12 (Report of the Economic and Social Council).
 May I take it that the General Assembly adopts that recommendation?
 May I take it that the General Assembly adopts this recommendation?
 May I take it that the General Assembly approves that recommendation?
 The President (interpretation from French): In connection with paragraph 45 (a) (iv) relating to item 51 (Question of Cyprus), the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that the item be allocated at an appropriate time later during the session.
 May I take it that the General Assembly approves this recommendation?
 The President (interpretation from French): We now turn to the recommendation in paragraph 45 (a) (v) concerning item 149 (Report of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991).
 May I take it that the Assembly adopts that recommendation?
 The President (interpretation from French): Next we turn to the recommendation in paragraph 45 (a) (vi) concerning item 150 (Commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War).
 May I take it that the Assembly adopts this recommendation?
 The President (interpretation from French): We now turn to the recommendation in paragraph 45(a)(vii) concerning item 151 (Observer Status for the South Pacific Forum in the General Assembly).
 May I take it that the Assembly adopts this recommendation?
 The President (interpretation from French): We turn now to the recommendation in paragraph 45 (a) (viii) relating to item 152 entitled "Observer status for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in the General Assembly".
 The General Committee decided to defer its recommendation on the allocation of the item to a later date.
 We turn to the recommendation in paragraph 45 (b) relating to item 62 concerning disarmament and the International Atomic Energy Agency report, not item 63, as indicated in this paragraph.
 May I take it that the Assembly approves the recommendation pertaining to item 62?
 The President (interpretation from French): Taking into account the decision just adopted, may I take it that the General Assembly approves the allocation of the items proposed for the First Committee in paragraph 46 of the report of the General Committee?
 The President (interpretation from French): We turn now to the list of items which the General Committee recommends for allocation to the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee).
 We turn to the recommendation in paragraph 45 (c), concerning item 148, entitled "The situation in the occupied territories of Croatia".
 The General Committee decided to defer consideration of the allocation of the item as a whole to a later date.
 We now turn to paragraph 45 (d) (ii) relating to item 158 on the report of the International Conference on Population and Development.
 The General Committee decided to recommend that the debate on the item should be held directly in plenary meeting, on the understanding that action on the item would be taken in the Second Committee.
 We turn to paragraph 45 (e) relating to item 95, entitled "Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family".
 We turn to the recommendation in paragraph 45 (f) relating to item 157, entitled "Question of criteria for the granting of observer status in the General Assembly".
 The President (interpretation from French): The General Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of the first report of the General Committee.
 The President (interpretation from French): I should like to inform the Assembly that Mali has made the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
 May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of this information?
 The President (interpretation from French): I should like to announce that the list of speakers for the plenary meetings devoted to the implementation of the follow-up to the International Year of the Family, to be held on Tuesday, 18 October, is now open.
 Only two plenary meetings were envisaged by resolution 47/237, but I have been informed that a considerable number of Members have expressed interest in participating in these meetings and that therefore two meetings might be insufficient.
 Thursday, 13 October 1994, 3 p.m. The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
 Mr. Londo (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on your election to the Presidency of the General Assembly at this session.
 We are assured that with your experience and skill you will guide our work with great success.
 Colombia joined in the adoption by the General Assembly of the report of the Working Group (A/48/47) by consensus on 14 September 1994.
 We believe it is appropriate to continue the debate in the same manner next year.
 Although some views were expressed on this item, we believe that there is still a long way to go.
 Colombia's position is well known.
 The credibility, representativeness and legitimacy of the decisions of the Council hinge on its methods of work and the effective participation and confidence which Member States place in the Council.
 We believe that a thorough, comprehensive reform should be undertaken and not simply an exercise to accommodate the interests of a few pre-selected States and an increase in the privileges of others.
 While the nature of the inclusion of the developing world in the international system allowed the creation of exceptional rights for some States, the time has come to change this once and for all.
 We have the responsibility to ensure that the United Nations shall achieve the objectives for which it was created - to promote development and the well-being of all nations in an environment of equality and justice.
 Those seats are the result of negotiations conducted in the past which have no validity in our times.
 Likewise, the veto should be restricted and eventually eliminated.
 Clearly, the idea of its extension to more members of the Security Council should be discarded.
 Similarly, we could agree to re-election of some seats according to the decisions of the General Assembly on a case-by-case basis.
 Thus the whole membership would endorse those States that had gained the confidence and support of the international community.
 Clearly, the main criteria would continue to be equitable geographical representation and the equality of States.
 This weakens the confidence among the Members of the Organization, takes away from the credibility of the decisions of the Security Council and limits their acceptance by Member States.
 The Council should discuss its items in open debates.
 A subsidiary organ of the General Assembly created in accordance with Article 22 of the Charter could contribute to the formulation of Security Council decisions and receive information before decisions are adopted.
 Such a subsidiary organ could likewise enlarge the application of certain Articles of the Charter, such as Article 11.
 Thus the President or Vice-President would ensure channels of communication and also ensure that the recommendations of the Member States are appropriately reflected in the Council's decisions.
 Thanks to their efforts, progress has been made in this difficult exercise.
 Throughout the year there was a productive exchange of views, which made it possible to pinpoint the major problems that we face in the sensitive task of adapting the Security Council to the new era, so different from that in which the Council was created.
 This is not a mere numerical exercise; rather, it concerns the principal organ responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security in the face of the challenges of a world very different from the one in which it came into being.
 My delegation has supported the need for a thorough reform of the Council, and we repeat our conviction that such reform cannot be confined to satisfying the aspirations of the new economic Powers.
 That would mean failing the international community, and we would justify the greatest criticism of the United Nations - that it often looks after the interests of the great Powers.
 It would also mean weakening the universality of the United Nations and fostering a lack of confidence in it; the resulting disillusionment and criticism would be all too understandable.
 The international community deserves to have a legitimate and effective Security Council.
 In this framework, some hold the view that the number of members of the Council determines its ability to act and that therefore any increase would have negative effects.
 It is often forgotten that, under the Charter, the Security Council has no authority of its own.
 Strictly speaking, the other 169 Member States have delegated to the Council specific responsibilities and authority with regard to peace and security.
 Last year we were fortunate enough to have a timely report and, for the first time in almost 50 years, it was presented personally by the Council's President - Ambassador Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg of Brazil that month - whom we again thank.
 We thought that an excellent precedent had been set.
 Regrettably, that does not seem to be the case.
 This year we are again experiencing the delay to which we have become accustomed.
 My delegation repeats that we believe there must be a summary report of informal consultations; a rapporteur might be the right mechanism.
 Another improvement would be the establishment of a system whereby members of the Council reported to their respective groups on matters under consideration by the Council.
 Greater communication between the Security Council and States affected by its decisions is urgently required.
 These procedural reforms do not require amendments to the Charter.
 They could be incorporated gradually into the practice of the Council or else into the final rules of procedure that its Members would eventually have to adopt.
 We know that this privilege, granted in San Francisco to the victors of the Second World War, paralysed the Council in the days of the cold war, and for almost five decades prevented it from acting effectively.
 But we are now living in different times.
 This new situation is encouraging and it is precisely for this reason that we can ask ourselves if the time has not come to correct some of the political necessities of 1945 and their distortions.
 It was said that the veto would oblige those Powers to take a unified stand and thus reach clear-cut agreements.
 However, it soon became apparent that the veto not only did not ensure such unity of views but that it in fact made it possible for the Powers to maintain their differences and defend their own interests without making any real efforts to have their views converge.
 Moreover, rather than making it less difficult to reach agreements among the nations it fosters differences and confrontation.
 Nothing would be more degrading for the prestige and image of the United Nations than artificially to revive non-democratic arrangements to accommodate the wishes of only a few countries.
 None the less, we should not unnecessarily repeat the errors of the past.
 We should aspire to regulate the use of the veto by the current five permanent members, whose number - I repeat - should not be increased for any reason.
 At the San Francisco Conference, in 1945, Australia also proposed that the veto not apply in cases involving the exercise of the Council's mandate under Chapter VI.
 This would be in keeping with the spirit of the Charter, granting the five permanent members the exclusive responsibility of adopting sanctions under Chapter VII without the possibility of paralysing the Council's efforts to find a peaceful, negotiated solution in accordance with Chapter VI.
 We believe the time has come to reconsider this proposal with a broad, long-term political vision that goes beyond vested interests.
 The procedure for bringing about such reforms is complex, since it requires approval by two-thirds of its membership, including the five permanent members.
 That is to say, it cannot be imposed.
 Amending the Charter is a two-way street.
 In other words, to reform the Charter, it is necessary to consider the general interest and not impose pressures or unilateral demands in order to bend the will of States with greater needs.
 Mexico supports the decision contained in the report that the Working Group should continue its work.
 We must redouble our efforts to make positive strides.
 With good faith and good will we could arrive relatively easily at conclusions that are shared by all and that would lead to a principle of consensus.
 But we also understand that in this task we cannot be simplistic. Nor can we just parade decisions, losing sight of the final objective: a substantive reform that will take account of the interests of all and avoid hasty arrangements that satisfy the interests of only a few.
 We should not establish any fixed dates or deadlines for the completion of this task.
 It is now time to negotiate, it is true, but without undue haste.
 Mr. Lamamra (Algeria)(interpretation from Arabic): Allow me first to extend my thanks and congratulations to President Samuel Insanally and the Ambassadors of Singapore and Finland for their wise and effective guidance of the Working Group whose report is now before the Assembly.
 The ideal formula for restructuring the Council must be based therefore on an international consensus derived from a wide-ranging, democratic and transparent debate in which care should be taken not to marginalize the developing countries which did not participate either in founding the Organization or in drafting its Charter.
 Thus, from the methodological point of view, my delegation opted for a comprehensive approach and expounded its ideas on the basis of two postulates.
 The first concerned the inequitable nature of the Council's present composition and its geographical and cultural imbalance.
 In addition, there is the fact that, given the large increase in membership in recent years, from a purely numerical point of view, the Council does not reflect the Organization's present-day composition.
 In this same context, we have frankly and clearly drawn attention to the need to regulate and limit the areas and subjects which may continue to be subject to the veto.
 To the contrary, such a step would be likely to worsen the imbalances that exist between developed and developing countries and give rise to competition and prejudicial contradictions that could affect the political climate prevailing in the world and within regional groupings.
 It also became clear that equitable representation on the Council is essential to the strengthening of its political and moral authority and would ensure for its resolutions the respect and voluntary implementation that are necessary for its efficacy.
 Some very useful ideas were put forward in this context with the aim of promoting greater interaction between the Council and its partners on the basis of transparency, cooperation and concerted action.
 Finding a formula that would be satisfactory to all may appear to be an extremely difficult undertaking.
 However, this difficulty should not be used as a pretext to opt out of the necessary transparent and democratic debate in order to replace it by bargainings that serve nothing but narrow individual ambitions.
 The difficult nature of the task should not dissuade us from continuing our efforts and collective discussions toward the desired consensus on a restructuring formula that would guarantee equitable representation, and ensure the effectiveness and credibility of the Security Council.
 Clearly, the world is now in a position to take advantage of a political climate that favours the introduction of meaningful reform of a Security Council, whose structures and philosophy were the products of a particular historical context and of political and military alliances that have become obsolete.
 Mr. Sucharipa (Austria): For the second time in recent years the General Assembly is considering the question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council.
 Since last year's debate the Working Group of the whole has had an extensive exchange of views.
 During the general debate of the current session many heads of delegation, including the Foreign Minister of my country, referred again to the question of reform of the Security Council.
 We should therefore now be in a position to advance the debate in order to prepare the ground adequately for the necessary decisions, which, in the final analysis, will have to be taken at the political level, as was made clear this morning by the Permanent Representative of Singapore.
 On the eve of the Organization's fiftieth anniversary we must ensure that it is well equipped to meet future challenges.
 A reformed Security Council that can rely on universal support will be of vital importance to the Organization in the decades to come.
 We believe that the future composition of the Council should in any case not exceed 25 members.
 Secondly, the work of the Security Council has in the past greatly benefitted from the input of both categories of its members - permanent and non-permanent.
 Thus the necessary continuity in its work and an appropriate reflection of the international power structure were combined with democratic elements ensuring representativeness and providing fresh ideas for the solution of impending problems.
 We therefore argue for the maintenance of such a balance between permanent and non-permanent members.
 Thirdly, in the debate so far the case has been made for additional permanent members.
 In our view, the choice of such members must reflect political and economic realities and be based on their ability to contribute financially as well as to the overall peace-keeping efforts of the United Nations.
 Fourthly, the future composition of the Security Council should reflect, through an appropriate balance in its membership, the reality and plurality of today's world.
 In our view, the addition of a limited number of regional seats endowed with rights similar to those of the existing permanent members could meet these requirements.
 Fifthly, despite some recent improvements - which we see as important steps - the question of accessible information channels between members and non-members of the Council remains an important one and constitutes an essential part of the discussion on the future composition of the Council.
 The degree to which Member States feel that they are represented by the Council depends to a large extent on the existing possibilities for interaction with the Council.
 Austria, as a country with a longstanding tradition in United Nations peace-keeping, has a special interest in closer cooperation and dialogue between the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries.
 In this context, we attach less relevance to the concrete procedure than to the results of such improved interaction.
 They should be taken seriously into consideration.
 Improved channels of information are also urgently necessary with regard to problems resulting for any countries from their compliance with sanctions regimes.
 Let me submit some considerations on how we might best further proceed in the discussion of the item before us.
 After this debate in plenary, at an appropriate time the Working Group of the Whole will be re-established.
 The views of Member States on the issue are by now widely known.
 We should therefore concentrate our work on concrete issues in the form of a focused discussion.
 To this end, we could define "building blocks" which might become constituent elements for a possible consensus or for the emergence of positions which might carry wide support.
 This process could be achieved by a combination of informal discussions within the Working Group, guaranteeing adequate transparency and consultation among interested members.
 Mr. Caputo (Italy): I should like first to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 We are convinced that your experience will guide our work with great success.
 Allow me to give a quick thumbnail sketch of our project.
 We would keep the number of permanent members at the current five, without adding new ones, because recent historical developments have shown that very little is permanent in modern international politics.
 We would instead increase the number of non-permanent members from 10 to 20.
 The 10 new seats would be allotted, in turn, to a group of 20 or eventually 30 Member States.
 The main criteria that could be adopted to identify these countries are already listed in Article 23 of the Charter.
 The first is their ability and willingness to participate in peace-keeping operations with financial, human and military resources.
 The peace-keeping budget already amounts to three times the regular budget of the Organization and is increasing.
 The two other criteria listed in Article 23 are equitable geographic distribution and a country's contribution to the other purposes of the Organization.
 In addition, other criteria could be taken into consideration, such as population size, economic resources and the willingness to contribute to humanitarian causes.
 In substance, this formula would guarantee the continuous presence in the Council of the current permanent members and at the same time a more frequent presence for 20 or 30 mid-size to large-size countries.
 Moreover, the larger number of members would make it easier to redress the present geographic imbalance on the Council.
 Indeed, after 50 years, it is about time for a new deal.
 We are convinced that our project would also benefit the 80 countries that have never been elected to the Security Council and the 43 that have served only once.
 In fact, as statistics clearly indicate, smaller States have been shut out of the Council by the fierce competition within their regional groups for the few available non-permanent seats, sometimes even despite existing regional agreements.
 By sheltering these small countries from the competition of the larger ones, we would provide them with greater access to the 10 non-permanent seats with normal rotation.
 Of course, one might argue in favour of open competition for all 20 non-permanent seats on a basis of absolute parity, but such an arrangement would clearly place the smaller States at a disadvantage, since they would still risk being elbowed out by the larger ones.
 Finally, we believe that a Council of 25 members would still be able to function efficiently and effectively, as the proportion between the original organization of the Security Council and the future one would be maintained.
 We have noted that other interesting and constructive proposals and suggestions have been presented, while many others may be in the pipeline.
 We welcome them all.
 In short, we intend to continue to participate in the exercise with an open mind and a constructive spirit, and to work together with other Member States to obtain the widest possible consensus.
 But we insist that everyone - even the representatives of the smallest countries - be partners at all times in the process, including consultation.
 We fully share the view that there are other, equally important issues concerning the reform.
 In addition to the quest for an enlarged Security Council, there is a compelling need for a reform of its methods and procedures and a thorough review of the Council's relations with the General Assembly, other organizations, and non-member countries.
 It is high time the provisional rules were made permanent and were adapted to the times in which we live.
 At present, however, this relationship is limited to a single annual report.
 This is not sufficient.
 Countries not members of the Security Council that contribute troops to United Nations peace-keeping operations should, for example, be assured of regular consultation on the conduct of an operation in which the lives of their soldiers are at stake.
 Finally, greater transparency is required in the workings of the Security Council.
 To this end, we must adopt measures to provide the United Nations membership with more regular information on the debates in the Security Council and on the various positions that emerge thence.
 First, the reform of the Security Council is too crucial an issue to be left to the work of restricted committees.
 The largest possible number of Countries - including, I repeat, the smaller ones - must be put in a position to participate.
 Therefore, in order to avoid overburdening small Missions, we suggest that the ad hoc Working Group not meet during the regular session of the General Assembly - that is to say, not before January of next year.
 May I conclude by assuring the Assembly that we shall continue to act in an open-minded and constructive way within the Working Group.
 Our final goal, one which I am sure we all share, remains that of securing greater participation, greater democracy, and greater efficiency and effectiveness for the Council.
 Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French): Allow me first of all, Sir, on my own behalf and on that of my delegation, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly and on your outstanding leadership of our work.
 Mr. Chaturvedi (India), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 They welcomed the General Assembly's adoption of resolution 48/246 of 29 July 1994, which is a new milestone in the creation of more effective interaction between those bodies, in accordance with the spirit and the letter of the Charter.
 My delegation has at various times stressed this important aspect of the question to make it possible for the international community to contribute more to the management of world affairs for the maintenance of international peace and security.
 We noted with great interest the limited but important initiatives taken by the Council to promote greater transparency in some of its working methods.
 We urge the Council to continue in that effort to respond to the aspirations of the majority of delegations, as expressed during the deliberations of the Working Group established under resolution 48/26, implementation of which is in keeping with the relevant provisions of the Charter.
 The Secretariat's new practice of convening informal meetings with the participation of some members of the Council, as well as the consultations held with troop-contributors, are encouraging, but could be improved upon and institutionalized.
 We are convinced that recourse to Article 29 of the Charter for the establishment of one or more subsidiary organs subordinate to the Security Council has the advantage of allowing the Council to entrust deliberations on issues of crucial importance to those larger bodies.
 Furthermore, the proliferation of peace-keeping operations and the experience gained by the Organization and by troop-contributing countries lend force to the idea of adapting the formula of using various types of consultations.
 Africa therefore pledges its complete cooperation and readiness to participate in discussions and decision making of the Council.
 We are convinced that the Working Group of the General Assembly has reached a stage in its deliberations which makes it possible, with a bit more effort, to outline concrete and feasible recommendations with regard to an increase in the membership of the Council and to its functioning.
 In this context, we wish to recall the position expressed by the Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement stressing the inadmissibility of any pre-established selection.
 One of the sacrosanct principles of our Organization is equitable regional representation.
 In this regard, we consider that Africa, like Asia and Latin America, is entitled to be equitably represented on the Security Council.
 I shall take the liberty of recalling the terms of the African ministerial declaration which states that at least two permanent seats should be given to this continent in the course of the current restructuring process.
 It is indeed contrary to the very essence of the democratization we are trying to achieve in a Security Council adapted to new realities to offer special status, in rather questionable fashion, to a new category of States or seats.
 Such a spirit could further enhance the Council's credibility and gain enthusiastic support from the Member States were it consistently reflected by the full, non-discriminatory implementation of all of its decisions.
 Consensus should, in our opinion, enshrine the principle of the indivisibility of collective security, confer proper legitimacy on decisions and guarantee their applicability.
 Mr. Insanally (Guyana): My delegation very much welcomes the opportunity which item 33 presents us for reviewing the progress of the Open-ended Working Group, established by resolution 48/26 to consider all aspects of an increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Council.
 An assessment of what has been achieved thus far and what remains to be done to fulfil the mandate of the resolution will serve to orient our future work with a renewed sense of purpose.
 Admittedly, circumstances did not permit a more comprehensive and detailed account of the Working Group's deliberations.
 Guided by the principle that all aspects of its mandate are interlinked and must be settled simultaneously, areas of specific agreement could not be listed.
 Yet it would be a great pity, in the view of my delegation, if the tacit nature of the report were now to invite a return to an exposition of matters already amply ventilated.
 Were this to happen, we would waste a great deal of time and perhaps lose the unique opportunity we have at this moment to create a more democratic and efficient Security Council.
 Clearly, our task is to bring about an increase in the Council's membership that would be more representative of the United Nations today.
 The present size and composition of the Council cannot be deemed by any yardstick to be equitable now. The Permanent Representative of Indonesia and Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement reflected in his statement this morning some of the outstanding concerns which we share in this regard.
 Thus far, much of our discussion of the question of size and composition appears to have been largely driven by financial considerations allowing for the addition of one or two States to the category of permanent member.
 We believe, however, that permanent membership should not be limited only to a select group of major military or economic Powers, but should also be open to developing countries which have a contribution to make to the Council's work.
 We rather fear, however, that any proposal for additional permanent members may now quickly become bogged down by the question of whether any such new members should have the right of veto.
 These aspirants could insist on having the same entitlement as all other permanent members, since anything less may suggest an inferior status.
 As a priority task, some reasonable ratio will have to be found between the numbers of permanent and non-permanent members, as well as any new category of members that may emerge to cater for regional representation on a rotational basis.
 Such regional representation can conceivably satisfy the interests of larger countries without unduly swelling the ranks of the permanent members.
 It is important to ensure, however, that no one region is over-represented in terms of numbers of permanent members, and that there is a proper balance among all categories.
 Many States have provided, through their written submissions to the Secretary-General and their statements to both the plenary and the Working Group, their several concepts of a model Security Council.
 Although there are some differences of specification, the principal features of design are common to most submissions, namely, equitable representation, transparency and effectiveness of operations.
 The Council has, to its credit, taken several initiatives to make its work more open and transparent.
 As it continues in this direction, both the credibility and the legitimacy of its actions will be commensurately enhanced.
 It will therefore have to go beyond set statements of position to an informal and frank exchange of views designed to pinpoint possible areas of agreement.
 Consequently, all matters treated by any auxiliary mechanism must be ad referendum to the Group as a whole.
 In its wisdom, the Assembly placed no constraints that would prevent us from giving ample consideration to all the important issues before us.
 The sooner this goal is achieved, the better it would be for the entire international community.
 My delegation is confident that under Mr. Essy's leadership, and with the able assistance of his two Vice-Chairmen, the Working Group will continue to make progress in the discharge of its mandate.
 The celebration next year of the Organization's fiftieth anniversary is certain to provide a strong psychological impetus to the process.
 We would therefore hope that, without being strait-jacketed by any considerations of time, we will work diligently to bring our labour to an early and full fruition.
 In this context, the focus of attention should be the Security Council, which bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
 The widespread demands for making that principal organ more representative, responsive, transparent and accountable should be met.
 The Council has to be restructured to reflect the new realities.
 In order to enable the Council to discharge its expanded responsibilities more effectively, the moral authority of the Council should be reinforced. These are the pressing needs to be met in order to have guaranteed international support in responding to new challenges and threats to international peace and security.
 Having taken note of the report on the progress of work of the Open-ended Working Group, we believe that the next stage of deliberations should be held on the basis of concrete proposals.
 We must build on the work done in the course of the forty-eighth session.
 There are mainly two aspects of our work which require equal attention. We have to enhance the representative weight of the Council and democratize its method of work.
 The modalities of the enlargement should also be elaborated.
 In this context, we firmly believe that the proposal submitted by Italy to the Open-ended Working Group merits careful consideration.
 The idea that there is a correlation between the size of the Council and its efficiency is inherently misleading.
 The Council will become more effective when it is perceived by the international community as being more equitably representative of the general membership, and thus more authoritative in its decisions.
 The present dichotomy - a Council that is relatively more efficient in its deliberations, yet, in turn, less effective in implementing its decisions - calls for thorough consideration.
 This new membership should rotate among a list of countries.
 However, this list could be updated after a certain time so that it does not lead to new privileges.
 Designating, for each elective seat, separate constituencies representing more or less equal potential and means, as well as a common determination to contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security, could enhance the representative weight of the Council and ensure more equitable geographical distribution.
 Setting up new constituencies for election could be one of the most effective ways to rectify the shortcomings and injustices of the present election system.
 Along with this idea of radical reform, we could also start thinking about finding ways and means within the geographical groups of ensuring a fair, equitable and workable system of rotation for all the non-permanent seats, including the 10 additional new members.
 My delegation will present these ideas in written form to the Open-ended Working Group in its new round of deliberations.
 Reform of the Council's working methods is the other aspect of our work.
 We have explained our views in the Working Group, and we will continue to elaborate on them.
 We believe, therefore, that we could finalize this part of our work more easily.
 In the same vein, the Council's rules of procedure, which are still provisional after almost 50 years, should be finalized to reflect the spirit of democratization.
 Our aim should be to make the Open-ended Working Group a genuine driving force for real reform.
 This is a historic task which we must fulfil.
 Moreover, the number of Members of the United Nations, on whose behalf the Council works, has greatly increased.
 By its resolution 48/26, the Assembly established a Working Group entrusted with the study of all aspects of the question of increase in the membership of the Security Council, and other matters relating to the Security Council.
 During the last session, the Working Group held numerous meetings, and the results of its work are contained in document A/48/47.
 In this respect, my country believes that, in carrying out its mandate, the Working Group should base itself on the principle of the full sovereign equality of States.
 The methodology of increasing the membership should be guided by this principle and not by particular choices or by any specific political, economic or military considerations.
 Effective reform of the Security Council and, in particular, the improvement of its working methods, necessitate transparency in the Council's activities.
 This transparency should characterize also the stage preceding the adoption of resolutions.
 My country's delegation believes that, to achieve this, the Council should consult with the countries concerned on the questions of which it is seized.
 The Council should also consult with the relevant regional organizations.
 To guarantee the universal acceptance and implementation of Security Council resolutions, my country's delegation believes that, before deciding to adopt such resolutions, the Security Council should engage in wider consultation - not in the context of informal consultations, but in formal meetings open to all Member States.
 In conclusion, my country's delegation would like once again to underline the extreme importance of this question, which is directly related to international peace and security and to relations between nations and peoples.
 The parameters of such a new world should be such that they would engender continued cooperation amongst States and create development and growth opportunities that measure up to the challenges of poverty, ignorance and backwardness and the need to consolidate peace amongst States and peoples.
 In this post-cold-war era, only through joint efforts of the international community can we sustain and promote world peace and stability.
 Japan does not, nor will it, resort to the use of force prohibited by its Constitution.
 Japan will remain resolutely a nation of peace.
 Japan intends to continue to cooperate actively in such United Nations peace-keeping operations.
 In particular, the Council will have to be restructured to reflect the new realities of the world, where the membership of the United Nations has dramatically expanded and where new global Powers have emerged with the will and the capacity to carry out greater international responsibilities.
 If the United Nations is to play a more active and effective role for the maintenance of international peace and security, as we believe it must, reform of the Security Council is without a doubt the most urgent task now facing the Organization.
 From that viewpoint, my delegation is gratified to note that the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council has conducted extensive and intensive discussions on this crucial question since the beginning of this year.
 In the light of the discussion held thus far and on the basis of that report, I wish to offer a few salient points which should guide our future deliberations within the Working Group, so that we may make further progress on this all-important question.
 As a basic framework of our future endeavour, it is imperative to build upon what we have achieved in the course of our discussions within the Working Group.
 A large number of Member States have actively participated in the deliberations of the Working Group and expressed their views and positions upon all the pertinent aspects of the issue.
 More specifically, it would seem generally agreed that a genuine effort to reform the Security Council will have to be pursued in two directions: reform of its organization and reform of its functioning.
 the emergence of new global Powers, which prompts us to envisage a limited increase in the number of permanent seats in addition to the current permanent members;
 the imbalance that has emerged in the geographical representation within the Council, which suggests that we should redress the overall distribution of seats.
 Secondly, with regard to the question of the functioning of the Security Council, issues such as improving the transparency of its work, strengthening the communication between members and non-members and so forth, have been raised under the rubric of "other matters related to the Security Council".
 A number of proposals have been submitted on this score, including a few by my own delegation.
 My delegation believes that it is now incumbent upon us to set out to examine if and to what extent these proposals are feasible and practicable.
 Finally, I should like to touch upon a procedural, but none the less important, question as to how the Working Group might best organize its work and proceed with its deliberations during the current session of the General Assembly.
 In the view of my delegation, the next round of the deliberations should therefore be qualitatively different from the previous round.
 To put it more specifically, I believe we should go beyond the exchange of respective positions of different delegations to move into the stage of formulating a package of concrete proposals to form a basis of agreement.
 As a prerequisite to this, we have to decide promptly upon the composition of the Bureau for the current session.
 Furthermore, in order to ensure progress in our work in a constructive direction, the Working Group will benefit greatly from informal consultations to be conducted parallel with its formal meetings.
 This will enable us to winnow out various options that are presented and expedite the process for realizing the convergence of views in our work.
 My delegation is prepared to offer its full cooperation in order to achieve this goal in our common endeavour.
 This year of difficult discussions was, we believe, useful, even if it has not yet resulted in any narrowing of the gap between our positions.
 We have today, more clearly than a year ago, a list of the problems to be resolved in order to reach an acceptable formula, and a list of the diverse aspirations of delegations in this exercise.
 This will be useful as we continue our work, in the phase that should now begin, of trying to reach a successful conclusion.
 I wish to thank Mr. Insanally for his personal contribution to the success of the consultations during the last session.
 We are all very happy about that.
 The interest publicly demonstrated on the subject by the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Amara Essy, is also an excellent omen, and we are pleased that he has assumed office at a decisive time in the exercise.
 But some realities should, we hope, gradually be accepted.
 Germany and Japan are, in my delegation's opinion, fully eligible to sit in the Security Council as permanent members, with all the prerogatives and obligations of the present permanent members.
 As for the modalities to ensure such complementary representation, my delegation is open to all suggestions at this stage; we do not rule out anything.
 For us this is not a question of principle on which permanent members have any particular concept to defend.
 We need to find a compromise in the form of an arrangement or set of arrangements which it is generally agreed improves the representation in the Council.
 My delegation does not see any obstacle in principle to that.
 It might also mean, either as a complementary or as an alternative formula, an increase in the number of non-permanent members, provided that the increase is only moderate and would not paralyse the Council's work.
 Making the non-permanent members eligible for another term after their two years in the Security Council would provide some flexibility in the formulas for representation.
 The Council has already made considerable progress on all these questions in recent months.
 The abiding concern of its members is to ensure clarity in the way its decisions are taken and transmitted.
 We are sure that if we are vigilant on this score, we shall have even better results.
 There are of course some principles that we intend to defend vigorously: First, the Council must remain the sole master of its decision-making process.
 Secondly, it should not give way to the temptation to micromanage peace-keeping operations; they must continue to be managed by the Secretary-General.
 Thirdly, it should be careful not to make the consultation meetings too formal; the very point of the consultations is that they allow for great flexibility of organization.
 But, without infringing those principles, the Council does have one way to ensure that Members of the Organization get a better hearing.
 The frustration that many delegations feel about the current methods of working could be resolved without impairing the Council's ability to react to situations.
 I am convinced that there will be much decisive progress next year on both aspects of this work, heralding a welcome compromise between different but quite legitimate aspirations of the Members of the United Nations about the future of the Organization and the role they will play in it.
 Mrs. Frechette (Canada): I should like to congratulate the President of the General Assembly on his election and pay tribute to his predecessor, who skillfully guided the work of the General Assembly and the Working Group on the reform of the Security Council.
 We would also like to thank both Vice-Chairmen of the Working Group, the Permanent Representatives of Finland and Singapore, whose tireless efforts greatly facilitated our work.
 The year that has passed since our last debate on this subject has been fruitful as we have been able within the Working Group to begin a dialogue and start to identify certain areas of convergence.
 This is in itself a worthwhile result, given the complexity of the exercise.
 We hope that we will be able from now on to devote our energies to discussing the terms of expansion.
 The report also rightly notes that the Council has taken certain steps to improve its methods of work and procedures.
 In our opinion, the expansion of the Security Council should accomplish four objectives: to make the Council more representative, to improve its efficiency, to improve its credibility and to improve its equity.
 An expanded Council will be more representative if a wider variety of interests and points of view can be expressed, while keeping in mind the principle of equitable geographical distribution set out in the Charter.
 On the contrary, it is important that while conducting broad consultations Council members continue to assume the individual responsibility conferred on them by the Charter and through their election by the General Assembly.
 An expanded Council will continue to be efficient if its expansion is limited; it will still be able to make prompt and effective decisions as it is called upon to do.
 It is now time to step up our work and start identifying other areas of convergence, as the Chairman of our Working Group attempted to do last year.
 For example, we have detected an emerging convergence of views on the desirable number of members - in the low twenties - for an expanded Council.
 There is no miracle solution to the question of expanding the Security Council.
 We should be ready to use our imagination and to consider different options.
 In this connection, new ideas such as those advanced by Italy and Australia could provide elements of a solution, and they merit further study.
 Canada is open to a number of possibilities: creating new permanent seats, establishing a category of semi-permanent seats, creating new non-permanent seats with or without the possibility of re-election, or reviewing the composition of regional groups.
 In our opinion, none of these ideas excludes any other.
 The creation of such a category would have the double advantage of allowing countries that more fully meet the requirements of Article 23 of the Charter to sit more frequently on the Council and of lessening the number of candidates for non-permanent Member status.
 Although the Council has made a great deal of progress in this direction, we feel that it must continue to improve its methods of work.
 At present, 75 countries are providing contingents - 78,000 troops in all - for United Nations peace-keeping operations.
 The Council must take into account this rapid and dramatic evolution in the importance of peace-keeping, and enter into direct and regular consultations with the countries that volunteer to implement the decisions of the Security Council.
 Without challenging the Council's responsibility for making the decisions required, this means that the Council should hold consultations with troop-contributing nations when renewing mandates and when significant events occur during the course of these operations.
 We hope that the Council will clearly recognize this necessity and fully commit itself to such consultations.
 Members can rely on the cooperation of our delegation to make constructive progress in our work as we seek to achieve concrete results as soon as possible.
 We are confident that under our current President's able leadership this matter will be significantly advanced during the current session.
 There is hardly any matter of greater importance on this Assembly's agenda.
 After all, peace and security are indispensable for effective democracy and development.
 Hence, democratization of the Security Council must be the critical issue of our time.
 Its existence partly explains the variety of claims for permanent membership by individual States and, we have been given to understand, by some who would speak on behalf of some of the United Nations regions.
 All of this is quite understandable, since the main attribute of permanent membership is the veto.
 During the past several months, this delegation and several others have proposed that, if it cannot be completely abolished, the veto institution should be reformed.
 With the veto so modified, the notion of permanent membership can itself be modified.
 After all, the rationale for permanent membership, as we know it, becomes irrelevant if there is no absolute right of veto.
 The discussion in the Working Group during the past several months has made it clear that it is this attribute of permanent membership that has stymied our efforts to agree on several matters.
 It is clear that in the new world order, democracy and equality are the paramount values.
 For self-evident reasons, these should be reflected in various aspects of each body of our Organization, especially in the title and incidents of membership of the Security Council.
 This delegation therefore proposes that there should be two classes of members: indefinite members, to replace the existing category of permanent members, and regular members, to replace the present category of non-permanent members.
 Each indefinite member would sit on the Council as long as it satisfied the relevant criteria.
 Let it be stressed that our proposals are equally applicable if the two present classes of permanent and non-permanent members are retained.
 The criteria for indefinite membership should be grounded in the realities of international relations.
 This delegation proposes that the most crucial realities here are size of population, contribution to the Organization's budget and contribution to international peace and security.
 This delegation therefore proposes that the threshold for indefinite membership should be a population of 100 million.
 This delegation proposes that the minimum contribution threshold should be 5 percent.
 A higher assessment of an additional, for example, 2 percent over the initial 5 percent would compensate for a population deficit of between 10 and 40 million.
 Finally, countries with populations in excess of 800 million would automatically be indefinite members without having to satisfy additional criteria.
 The chief criterion for regular Council membership would be membership of the United Nations.
 It is further proposed that a State that fails to satisfy the population threshold for indefinite membership might, by agreement, combine with one or more adjacent States as a composite or constituency indefinite member.
 Adjacency would include strategic adjacency across a body of water, no matter how large.
 This delegation would like to stress that under this modality, the right to vote and the exercise of the veto would be rotated, possibly at intervals of one to three months.
 The composite modality is clearly a form of constituency association, which is becoming relatively popular in organizations and agencies that provide specific benefits or have defined and tangible functions.
 It should therefore work well in the Security Council.
 In this context it would dramatically improve the opportunities of many scores of developing countries which, as demonstrated by a survey referred to by the delegation of Italy, have never been members of the Council.
 Furthermore, the composite or constituency modality would encourage effective regionalism and the establishment of regional arrangements or agencies under Chapter VIII of the Charter, since membership in such arrangements or agencies as are approved by the Council could be deemed to satisfy the adjacency criterion.
 The composite or constituency notion might be regarded as novel.
 In fact, the very essence of the concept of security ushered in by the Second World War and the Charter is its shared nature.
 This is underscored by Chapter VIII and by the main institutions of Chapter VII, including collective self-defence.
 Current trends in peace-keeping, peacemaking and humanitarian assistance would appear to confirm this point.
 Therefore, the Belize proposals, while giving full scope to the present, somewhat arbitrary, continental regions, also emphasize a variety of types of genuine security regions.
 Since, in both categories, a composite or constituency group of two or more States would count as one member, the actual number of participating States could be considerably larger than 23.
 Whatever the surface details of my delegation's proposals, it may be that these ideas are as simple as one can expect proposals on the maintenance of peace and security to be in our twenty-first-century world of diverse regions, cultures and economic and social realities.
 We are therefore not surprised at the considerable interest that has been awakened by the discussion on the subject that has been held over the past two years, one marked by a wide participation that has been highly instructive.
 While the report on the progress made by the Working Group has been factual in nature where we might have hoped to see it reflect some progress on substantive questions, we believe that debate within that Group has been as useful as it has been necessary.
 The open, frank and constructive participation of so many delegations expressing often very different positions is, in our opinion, an unavoidable phase through which we must pass if we wish to achieve a broad and solid political agreement that will fully reflect the majority will of Member States.
 Thus, we must not curb this impetus but must increase our efforts to achieve, within a reasonable period of time, a consensus on the substantive issues under discussion.
 We believe that the Council, by carrying out its principal task of maintaining international peace and security, will help build the safer and more humane world to which we all aspire.
 This is especially needed when it comes to countries involved in peace-keeping operations, which have legitimate interests and whose proposals must be heard.
 Similarly, Chile's delegation deems it especially important for reform to lead to greater transparency in decision-making, something that is indispensable if we want to enhance the Council's legitimacy and credibility.
 The Government of Chile has welcomed the progress towards greater transparency in the Council's practices and procedures that do not require changes in the Charter.
 We view this as a first step in the right direction.
 In our view, that increase must reflect the current number of States Members of the Organization and the reality of the new international scene in all its aspects, as well as equitable representation for all existing regional groups.
 We agree with the general view that has emerged from the discussions of the Working Group that the adjustment in the Council's membership should not exceed 24 or 25, so as the better to reflect present-day realities.
 Because of the importance my delegation attaches to the need for greater democratization and balance in the Council's composition and decision-making mechanism, we have proposed, inter alia, the establishment of a category of regional members with an extended mandate.
 A new category of this kind would give countries in the main regions of the developed world - as regional representatives or representatives with an extended mandate - a say in the Council's decisions, without the right of veto, and with the possibility of re-election.
 This would enable countries with the necessary economic and political capacity to contribute to the work of the Council.
 We welcome the fact that the veto has been used less in recent years, and we look forward to the devising of formulas to avoid its use in the future.
 As regards categories, we have considered the retention of the category of non-permanent member without the possibility of re-election; the criteria for their election are contained in Article 23 of the Charter, but we must bear in mind that this Article refers also to equitable geographical distribution.
 It must faithfully meet the criteria of wide representativeness if it is to enhance the international community's unequivocal and universal support for all its resolutions and decisions.
 At stake here is not just the reform per se of an organ of the system but the very credibility and prestige of the United Nations itself.
 The Government of Chile, aware that this item will pose major challenges and involve major responsibilities, aspires to a seat on the Security Council for the period 1996 and 1997 with a view to contributing to the new spirit of cooperation in international relations.
 As the Foreign Minister of Chile pointed out at this rostrum a few days ago, we are convinced that we can legitimately and properly represent the interests of Latin America and the Caribbean, and indeed of the international community, in this important organ.
 We should like to express our satisfaction at the open-mindedness and the active participation that have so far been demonstrated in the treatment of this very complex item.
 We hope that we shall soon see the consensus necessary to achieving progress in respect of the substantive aspects of our debate.
 Mr. P\x{5aee}sson (Iceland): I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the five Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden - in addressing the question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council.
 May I refer also to the joint Nordic position paper that was presented in the Working Group last June.
 This paper covered, in a preliminary way, most of the questions under discussion.
 We stand ready to develop further the thoughts contained in the paper, in cooperation with other interested delegations.
 While I do not wish to recapitulate the paper's main points, which remain valid, I should like to use this opportunity to reiterate the Nordic countries' strong support for limited expansion of Council membership.
 This would strengthen the Council's ability to act rapidly and effectively, while reflecting the growing number of States Members of the Organization.
 Furthermore, particular importance should be given to the question of additional seats for non-permanent members, taking into account the principle of equitable geographical distribution.
 Since June the Working Group has submitted a report to the General Assembly.
 The Nordic countries welcome the report and appreciate the Group's dedicated efforts in harmonizing the different views that were put forward.
 I should like to reiterate the Nordic countries' keen interest in pursuing this matter further.
 In the general debate several countries presented a number of ideas and thoughts on how to take the issue forward.
 In the view of the Nordic countries, time is now needed to contemplate the various new ideas.
 We believe that consultations with all interested delegations should take place during the main part of the General Assembly session.
 Whatever the form, the Nordic countries consider it important that this work be continued with a view to arriving, in due course, at a conclusion acceptable to all.
 Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): Let me begin, Sir, by repeating President Clinton's congratulations to you on your recent election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 The United States is pleased to see you in the Chair, and we look forward to working with you to ensure a successful session.
 Moreover, in our judgement, the debate gave rise to several broadly supported principles that could guide future efforts as we seek final agreement.
 Several of these principles were reiterated by our colleagues during the general debate just concluded.
 First, as the statements of Argentina, Austria and Poland rightly stressed, the test of acceptability of any decision to expand the Council must be that it broadens participation while safeguarding operational efficiency and effectiveness.
 If we take these principles to be our compass, we cannot fail to see our course clearly.
 Indeed, the views of the United States are precisely along these lines.
 First, we welcome changes to the Council's composition that enhance its representativeness while protecting its effectiveness and efficiency.
 Thirdly, guided by the criteria just noted, we enthusiastically endorse Japan and Germany for permanent membership.
 Fourthly, we also see the need for an increase in non-permanent seats, namely, an addition of three seats for a total Council membership of 20.
 Fifthly, in order to give Member States greater influence over the selection of non-permanent Council members without restricting the opportunity of small countries to serve as Council members, we favour exempting non-permanent seats from the prohibition of re-election.
 Finally, the Security Council is actively pursuing means by which non-members may contribute to its work.
 The United States is directly engaged in this effort, which has already produced valuable results, and we believe that it must continue.
 The addition of Japan and Germany will join the energies, talents and resources of these enormously capable countries to the task of safeguarding our common security.
 Indeed, Japan and Germany have shown themselves eager and well-equipped to act in newly critical areas such as peace-building and conflict prevention.
 Secondly, an enhanced partnership means two things for the non-permanent seats.
 They ought to be increased in number without damaging Council decision-making and the rotation of countries in those seats should assure that the Council can benefit from the participation of those countries, including small States, with a record of constructive involvement in United Nations peace and security efforts.
 On the latter point, we want to emphasize that important steps have already been taken to improve the flow of information about Council decisions and to provide occasion for troop contributors to offer views on matters pertinent to Council decisions on peace-keeping mandates.
 One example is a growing participation by Security Council members in troop-contributor meetings.
 One possibility is for Council members to make more regular use of selected troop-contributor meetings to invite comment on resolution elements concerning changes in peace-keeping mandates.
 While such meetings will still be chaired by the Secretariat, the role of the Secretariat in such cases could be to provide a venue for direct exchanges between Council members and troop contributors.
 The United States is committed to exploring ways to strengthen working relations with troop contributors, and more openness and transparency are certainly possible.
 But I should caution that, in decision making, transparency is a good servant but a poor master. Too much will inhibit frank discussion and drive it away from the Council's chambers to settings in which privacy can be assured.
 That would not serve anyone's interests.
 First, over the course of the general debate, some speakers have urged their colleagues to delay any action on Security Council expansion for several years.
 They argue that the world is so unsettled today that it is unwise to enter into structural changes to the Security Council which are intended to be lasting.
 For the United States, this is a false choice.
 The case to strengthen the Council is compelling precisely because of the mounting tumult of the post-cold-war world and the dangers it poses to all of us, not 10 years from now but today.
 Secondly, while the sessions of the Working Group were helpful in defining the spread of opinion and bringing forth the principles I mentioned, they are too large a venue for the frank give-and-take needed to bridge remaining differences.
 We therefore urge you, Sir, and the Bureau to consider inviting small, informal groups of Members to meet with you over the coming months to explore areas of common ground and possible formulas for reaching agreement on Council expansion.
 Finally, as others stated during the general debate, we too would like to see an acceleration of deliberations on this subject during the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
 But in this regard we do not favour a piecemeal approach.
 Rather, we are hopeful that agreement may be reached on all elements of an overall package by the fiftieth session of the General Assembly.
 May I take it that the General Assembly adopts this recommendation?
 May I take it the Assembly decides to reconsider the allocation of this sub-item?
 May I take it that the Assembly decides to reconsider the allocation of this sub-item?
 The President (interpretation from French): May I now take it that the General Assembly adopts the recommendation of the General Committee?
 May I take it that the General Assembly decides to include in its agenda this additional sub-item as sub-item (e) of agenda item 37?
 The President (interpretation from French): In paragraph 5 (b) of the report, the General Committee recommends that the sub-item be considered directly in plenary meeting.
 In the afternoon, the Assembly will conclude the debate on agenda item 33.
 I should like to inform members that the Assembly will consider agenda item 152, entitled "Observer status for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in the General Assembly", at a later date to be announced in the Journal.
 Regarding item 92, "Agenda for development", the special plenary meetings at a high level to consider ways of promoting and giving political impetus to an agenda for development, which were called for in resolution 48/166 of 21 December 1993, will be held on Monday, 21 November.
 On Friday, 21 October, the Assembly will hold the debate on sub-item (d) of agenda item 89, entitled "Elaboration of an international convention to combat desertification in those countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertification, particularly in Africa".
 On Monday, 7 November, the Assembly will hold the debate on sub-item (e) of agenda item 89, entitled "Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States."
 Lastly, with regard to sub-item (e), on Afghanistan, of agenda item 37, "Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance", the Assembly will consider agenda item 37 as a whole on Wednesday, 23 November.
 May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of this information?
 Mr. Marker (Pakistan): Pakistan has actively participated in the constructive consultations held by the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council.
 I would again wish to express our deep appreciation for the able manner in which Mr. Insanally, the preceding President of the General Assembly, and the two Vice-Chairmen, Mr. Chew Tai Soo of Singapore and Mr. Wilhelm Breitenstein of Finland, guided the work of the Group.
 Thus, the Group's deliberations could not culminate in concrete conclusions and recommendations.
 As is noted in the Working Group's report and the Secretary-General's annual report on the Work of the Organization, this subject is open for further discussion.
 The presumption was that five permanent members, allies during the war, would continue to act in harmony.
 This assumption proved incorrect once the world became polarized during the prolonged cold war.
 During that period, the Council was unable to reach decisions on any issue that invoked the rival interests of the two super-Power blocs.
 Most conflicts were settled not by the Council but by the major Powers outside the Council.
 Instead of a new world order, supervised by the Security Council, we are confronted with a series of disputes and conflicts across Africa and Euro-Asia.
 It is in this context, and with a full appreciation of the Security Council's strengths and limitations, that we should seek to promote ways and means to make it more effective in preserving international peace and security.
 The Security Council has in-built inequities. It is composed of a very small number of Member States.
 It is divided between permanent and non-permanent members, those with the veto and those without.
 The purpose of our present exercise should be to promote greater democracy and transparency in the work of the Council.
 The general membership of the United Nations has increased from 51 in 1945 to 184 in 1994.
 We therefore share the general desire of Member States to strengthen the role of the Council, as well as to review its composition to reflect adequately the increase in its membership, particularly of the larger number of small and medium-sized States that have joined the United Nations.
 The Council's current composition lacks balance in terms of geographic distribution.
 We must bear in mind that this item was originally inscribed to consider an increase in the non-permanent membership of the Security Council.
 We should not allow the present consultations to be taken over to accommodate the objectives of only a few countries.
 An increase in the permanent membership of the Council, instead of enhancing the Council's effectiveness, would serve only to alienate the small and medium-sized countries that constitute a majority in the General Assembly.
 Some concepts for creating new categories, such as regional or semi-permanent members, have been introduced.
 The criteria for non-permanent membership, in addition to those contained in Article 23 of the Charter, require to be more seriously applied.
 Obviously, the size of a reformed Security Council would be central to the reform package.
 The Council should be kept small enough to guarantee efficiency and effectiveness, but it should be large enough to ensure adequate representation of the small and medium-sized States.
 However, in addition to the size of the Council there are other aspects that need equal attention in the reform process.
 Any meaningful review of the functioning of the Council should encompass the broader and vital issues of democratization and transparency in the decision-making process.
 Democratization can be achieved by redefining the Council's relationship with the General Assembly and with other United Nations bodies.
 An effective mechanism can be established to convey to the Council the General Assembly's views and recommendations on peace and security as a means of enhancing the participation of the general membership of our Organization in the Council's decision-making process.
 Instead of the present practice of a pro-forma discussion of the Council's annual report, the General Assembly should discuss it more substantively and critically, in accordance with Articles 11, 14 and 35 of the Charter.
 A working group of the Assembly could be created to analyse the Council's report before its consideration in the plenary Assembly.
 There is legitimate reason to fear that the economic crises of today debt, desertification, decline in commodity prices could lead to the political conflicts of tomorrow within and among States.
 The Economic and Social Council could serve, in many cases, to provide the Security Council an early warning of impending upheavals and conflicts.
 However, more concrete steps are required for closer consultation with United Nations Members, particularly the troop-contributing countries, in pursuance of Article 44.
 A subsidiary organ of the Council could be established, under Article 29, to monitor the peace-keeping operations and to institutionalize a system of direct consultations with troop-contributing countries during the process of making decisions regarding such operations.
 We fully support the position taken on this issue by the Non-Aligned Movement at its summit in Jakarta in 1992, and at the ministerial meeting in Cairo last June.
 It must be based on consensus and agreement among Member States.
 A decision on this question that lacks the support of the general United Nations membership will be counterproductive.
 It could erode general support for the future role of the Security Council and cast doubt on the sanctity of its decisions.
 The last reform of the Council took years to mature, although it addressed only one question: an increase in the non-permanent membership.
 It takes time to muster broad support for Charter amendments.
 Today, we are embarking on a comprehensive reform of the Council, including its enlargement.
 Pakistan will work patiently and diligently with other United Nations Members to evolve a decision on the reform of the Security Council that advances the cause of peace, security and the aims and objectives of the Charter.
 We have to be patient in this important exercise without being tardy.
 Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): Mr. President, may I first add my congratulations to you on the assumption of your high office.
 The general debate of the General Assembly has reaffirmed, if reaffirmation were needed, the importance that Member States of this Organization accord to the enlargement of the Security Council.
 A representative and effective Security Council is clearly in the interests of all.
 My Government's position on most aspects of the enlargement question has already been set out in detail in the Open-ended Working Group.
 In that context, we would support the permanent membership of Japan and Germany.
 Concerning Other related matters, the Security Council, through the work of its informal Working Group concerning the Council's documentation and other procedural questions, has taken a number of steps over the last year to increase the transparency of Council activities.
 Priority has also been given to efforts to enhance arrangements for consultation of troop contributors.
 But I would like to reaffirm my delegation's commitment to continuing to support the Council's efforts to enhance transparency, while doing nothing that would damage its efficiency and effectiveness.
 Although the task before the Open-ended Working Group remains a difficult and sensitive one, we were glad to note that there was some convergence of views in the course of its work this year on the nature of the enlargement that might be achieved.
 My delegation will work with others to achieve, if possible, a positive outcome on this most important question.
 This report illustrates the divergences that persist regarding various aspects of reform of the Security Council, whose complexity and sensitive nature are clear to all.
 The General Assembly decided that the Working Group should continue its consultations during the forty-ninth session and submit a further report before the end of the session.
 But it has the merit of being the only universal tool for conflict management.
 For Belgium, therefore, the present debate on reform of the Security Council should always be directed at strengthening the Council's action for the maintenance of international peace and security.
 Belgium is convinced that the best basis for reforming the Security Council is pragmatism, not prejudgements and highly detailed theorizing.
 Recent developments in those relations make it imperative that the Council be adapted to the new challenges before it.
 We consider that an increase of from two to five additional members would seem most appropriate to respond both to the Council's need for effectiveness and to the need for better representativity.
 Secondly, as my Minister for Foreign Affairs said recently in this Hall, the international community would do well to grant permanent membership to two economic Powers whose positive role in world affairs has long been recognized.
 As the Secretary-General observed in his most recent report on the work of the Organization, economic and social development contribute to strengthening the maintenance of international peace and security.
 Moreover, an additional non-permanent seat should be granted to the regions that consider themselves under-represented.
 Thirdly, the distinction between permanent and non-permanent members should remain unchanged.
 To try to modify it by creating a new category of membership would spark an unpredictable debate on determining the new criteria.
 With further Working Group consultations in view, I wanted to recall our conceptual approach and some of its practical results.
 For Belgium, realism continues to be the most reasonable approach if we want to achieve reform of the Security Council, and particularly if we want to retain some influence on the ongoing process.
 For some, the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations could be the setting for Security Council reform.
 Certainly, Belgium would favour reform of the Security Council coinciding, if possible, with the marking of the Organization's half century.
 All reform measures should be conducive to the realization of those objectives.
 Any reform measures should reflect the interest of every Member State.
 This shows that the task facing us remains arduous and a serious, practical and patient approach is required to continue the extensive exchange of views and to seek common ground step by step.
 During the discussion, a great number of proposals on various aspects of this question were made.
 We believed and continue to believe that the current composition of the Security Council, its functioning and methods of work ought to be adjusted in order to make the Security Council a more representative body taking into account new regional realities and new participants in international relations.
 The enlargement of the membership of the Council, which is a principal organ of the United Nations, acting in accordance with Charter provisions on behalf of all Member States, would considerably enhance the credibility and legitimacy of its decisions.
 It is essential, however, to preserve the effectiveness of the Council's work, its capacity to respond without delay to any threat to peace and security, to consider promptly such situations and to take necessary decisions based on the Charter.
 Discussions held in the Working Group illustrated that to achieve this balance, which would be acceptable to all regional groups and all Member States, was not an easy task.
 In 1963, when the first and only reform of the Council was undertaken, the Eastern European Group consisted of 10 States and was represented in the Council by one permanent and one non-permanent member.
 Disregarding this principle would make achievement of a consensus acceptable to all very difficult.
 Some delegations supported this proposal.
 However, some other countries either expressed doubts about the advisability of the existence of the third category or strongly objected to this idea.
 In this context we would like to emphasize that we continue to find it useful and worthy of further consideration.
 We are convinced that all United Nations Member States would benefit from the establishment of a third category.
 In this connection, and in the light of other realities of the modern world, it seems appropriate to change the procedure that now allows one State to block the solution of a question that is of concern to the entire international community.
 The delegation of Ukraine also shares the view, repeatedly expressed in the Working Group, that greater transparency must be ensured in the work of the Security Council, particularly in the decision-making process.
 We think that this would allow all Members of the Organization to participate more actively in the Council's work and would ensure stronger support for its decisions by all Member States.
 The Working Group has done extremely important work.
 The range of relevant views is very broad but much is still to be done to coordinate positions so that future membership of the Council, the efficiency of its work, and its composition meet the interests of all regional groups, all States in general, and each State in particular.
 Ukraine is ready to cooperate with other States for precisely such a reform of the Security Council.
 These proposals were prepared, as everyone knows, in the Dumbarton Oaks talks, with the participation of delegations from the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and China.
 Since last year, when the General Assembly decided in its resolution 48/26 to set up the Working Group, progress has undeniably been made.
 The Working Group has held many meetings and has heard the views of many Member States on all the issues, which have thus been clearly identified.
 All these statements are a very valuable basis for our continued work, as are the documents prepared by the Secretariat and by the Chairman of the Working Group, Ambassador Insanally, and the written inputs from several delegations or groups of delegations.
 So we still need to go into greater depth and discuss further the scope of this area of convergence.
 These principles and this objective are still fully valid.
 Reform of the Security Council is a tremendously complex issue and should be approached in a well-thought-out way through a process of dialogue that will lead to understanding among all Member States.
 Mr. Arystanbekova (Kazakhstan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 Each of those categories of actions by the Council would require a different majority, which would be larger if the decision to be taken was more important.
 This would make it possible to establish that the so-called veto right would be applied only to the third category of decisions: in other words, to those adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter.
 The Working Group now has an abundance of documentation, including a large number of national replies containing proposals and observations that must still be made more specific.
 This is indicated by the report of the Working Group itself.
 Nonetheless, there is sufficient material that, if appropriately structured, could enable us, as we proceed in our work, to identify broad areas of consensus.
 My delegation takes the view that the present configuration of the Working Group should be retained so that it can continue its deliberations at this forty-ninth session.
 I assure the Assembly that my delegation will continue to take part in the work of the Working Group and to extend the necessary cooperation to the presidency so that we can move towards consensus and reach generally agreed-upon conclusions by the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations.
 Yesterday we heard from many delegations that have found the Italian proposal a solid foundation upon which to build.
 The large industrialized States have never really had any problems over representation or almost anything else.
 Medium-sized States, developing or industrialized, have done very well during the last 49 years.
 We wish them continued luck.
 Small States, however, have not been as lucky.
 They comprise about 125 Members and thus constitute the two-thirds majority needed for amendment of the Charter, should amendment take place.
 Equitable representation is the main issue; it is the reason for our presence here today, and it led to the formation of the Open-ended Working Group.
 San Marino is a small State, but we proudly declare that our total contribution to the regular United Nations budget is higher per capita than that of all other Member States.
 He definitely did not have San Marino in mind.
 The Italian proposal would give small States 10 non-permanent seats on the Security Council, to be shared by 125 States on a frequent-rotation basis.
 Nevertheless it at least guarantees us the enjoyment of our equitable rights approximately once every 22 years, should we opt for two-year tenure.
 Either constituency or regional grouping would, in the final analysis, lead to the same results once a 22-year or 12-year frequent rotation schedule was adopted.
 Certainly, we do not welcome such consultations wholeheartedly, but by their very delicate nature they are essential in every community, including a democratic one.
 On 15 June this year our delegation suggested a stipulation that any proposed amendment to a draft resolution considered in an informal meeting of the Security Council must be made only in writing and be printed immediately in blue, thus allowing every interested party to have access to it.
 Our delegation heard with pleasure the announcement yesterday concerning the renomination of the two Vice-Chairmen of our Open-ended Working Group, Ambassador Breitenstein of Finland and Ambassador Chew of Singapore.
 They both made remarkable efforts to make our deliberations, within the framework of our mandate, impeccable.
 When speaking of the two Vice-Chairmen, we must also express our highest esteem to Ambassador Insanally, who as President of the General Assembly, guided us all with his articulate eloquence and reliability.
 On several occasions my delegation has expressed a desire to open the doors of our deliberations in the Open-ended Working Group to the media as a serious step towards the further democratization of our work.
 Nothing similar has been undertaken over the past 50 years, and, most probably, nothing similar will be undertaken for decades to come.
 I should like to repeat once again that the press, both local and international, are the backbone of our democratic system and constitute an integral part of our healthy structure.
 Stimulating reporters, editorialists, commentators and other journalists to criticize our endeavours and comment on our performance may polish and renew our approach and conduce acamedic institutions to get involved in our work intellectually and academically.
 Our yearning to develop transparency in the Security Council will not be truly helped if we keep our own doors closed while we ask the Council to keep its doors open.
 We should be consistent.
 We believe in, and are proud of, the presentations we make.
 We are not and cannot be intimidated by the presence of a journalist, a reporter or a cameraman.
 I should like to conclude by congratulating him on his election.
 Mr. McKinnon (New Zealand): In the course of this year Member States have had a thorough opportunity to discuss representation on the Security Council and related matters.
 All issues were traversed and all points of view were heard.
 This, in itself, is useful.
 We now have a body of debate on which we can draw in future discussions.
 The draft resolution before us would provide for the continuation of that discussion at this session and for a further report to be submitted by the Open-ended Working Group before the end of the session.
 My delegation supports the draft resolution, but we believe that we need to think very clearly about what we should seek to achieve next year.
 New Zealand reached certain conclusions from the discussion in the Working Group.
 However, they will remain the focus for New Zealand's ongoing consideration of this question.
 We note in particular the very detailed suggestions set out by the Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Gareth Evans.
 We say this because, in our view, if we are to make progress, proposals must encompass the totality of the issues that were debated earlier this year.
 Given the variety of perspectives that Member States bring to this issue, it would make no sense, and would not be acceptable, to seek to deal with the question of expansion in unrelated parts.
 If for no other reason, such a mode of proceeding could scarcely be construed as equitable.
 And equity fairness and balance are what we are required to achieve.
 What does this mean in practice?
 First, proposals must deal not only with the question of expansion but also with how that expansion should be distributed, bearing in mind that the Charter has always made provision for a geographical allocation of seats on the Council.
 Secondly, proposals should not be made that are narrowly limited with regard to the nature of the expansion they propose.
 For my delegation the key to the successful handling of such aspirations is to look at solutions that are regionally based.
 Different regions have quite different approaches.
 But whatever approach is adopted, we believe that a measure of accountability based on performance should be at the heart of any reform.
 Fourthly a point worth making when we speak of accountability perhaps any amendment to the Charter should include a provision that no Member State that is in arrears in its financial contributions should expect to be on the Council.
 Fifthly, while it is not essential to reconfigure the regional groups as part of this exercise, the Australian proposal demonstrates why we might need to do so.
 This suggests that any comprehensive proposal will need to take account of that aspect.
 Sixthly, to move forward we shall need to examine, in the context of concrete proposals, other necessary adjustments to the Charter.
 Finally, I need to address the second but no less important limb of the Working Group's mandate and of our draft resolution the related matters.
 For my delegation, reforming the way the Security Council operates is every bit as important as reforming its membership.
 Indeed, New Zealand suggests that, even if we were able to achieve the perfect size and balance, we would still have almost all the problems we have today unless the members of the new Security Council changed the Council's ways of doing business.
 I am not going to repeat what we have said in the Working Group, where we reviewed the useful improvements that have already been made in Security Council practice which we applaud and the very many more changes that need to be made in the near future.
 New Zealand feels some small sense of accomplishment in that, along with a number of like-minded colleagues on the Security Council, it has played a role in beginning to make the necessary changes.
 I am referring to the urgent need for reform in the Security Council's practice in respect of consultation with countries contributing troops to peace-keeping operations and with regional countries.
 Together with Argentina, we have circulated in the Security Council a draft resolution on this subject.
 We are working very hard to achieve consensus on this proposal.
 Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): As one of the principal organs of the United Nations, the Security Council has had conferred on it by the Members of the Organization responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
 Unfortunately, the Council was unable to play the role expected of it, especially during the cold war era, when bloc rivalries were the most prominent characteristic of international relations.
 In our view and this is something that has been said by others the current composition of the Security Council does not represent the general membership of the United Nations.
 At present, the indications are that developed countries are over-represented while the developing countries are under-represented.
 That being the case, every effort should be made to ensure equitable and balanced representation in the Council.
 More important, the Council's working methods and procedures, as well as its decision-making process, need to be improved.
 In this regard, my delegation wishes to underline several points.
 One vivid example in this regard is the Council's approach to the aggression against the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Council's questionable handling of the crisis.
 Secondly, while my delegation recognizes the need for the holding of appropriate informal consultations among members of the Council, some mechanism should be devised to inform, and if required consult with, non-members of the Council.
 Since the Council's effectiveness is intertwined with the commitment of the Member States, it is essential to retain the moral legitimacy of the Council by ensuring the participation of Member States in the decision-making process.
 Thirdly, a new balance should be struck between the General Assembly and the Security Council to fill the existing gap between the general membership and the Council.
 In this context, the jurisdiction and prerogative of the General Assembly with respect to international peace and security should not be overlooked.
 It goes without saying that the Council should present comprehensive and analytical reports to the Assembly rather than a compilation of document symbols and references.
 Fourthly, veto power is incompatible with the objective of democratizing the United Nations.
 This power, which has lost its raison d'\x{76bb}re, must therefore be removed or at least drastically revised and brought into line with the reform of the United Nations so that a democratic process of decision-making may be achieved.
 In conclusion, my delegation pledges its full cooperation in the work of the Open-ended Working Group.
 It is our hope that the Group's work will be transparent and that there will not just be a predetermined formula presented to the membership as a whole for approval.
 Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): I am highly honoured to speak on behalf of the countries of Central America: Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica and Panama.
 Indeed, by its resolution 48/26 of 3 December 1993, the General Assembly took note of the report of the Secretary-General, which reflected the view of a number of Member States on the item in question.
 Our region notes with gratitude the report presented by the Open-ended Working Group on equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council document A/48/47, dated 2 September 1994.
 That report gives a brief account of the work carried out, but it does not offer any conclusions or state any tangible results achieved on this issue.
 Once they have been carefully studied, they may well serve as the basis for a text that reflects the objectives we all seek to achieve.
 Its total and utter removal will serve fully to safeguard the principle of the sovereign equality of States Members of this Organization, contained in Article 2 (1) of the Charter.
 Some months ago, the Secretary-General proposed An Agenda for Peace, and recently he has set forth the principles that should form the basis of An Agenda for Development.
 International conferences addressing various economic, social and humanitarian questions have been held at the highest level.
 It is in this context that we believe that the highest political decision-making body of our Organization should be democratized, and reflect the new state of affairs prevailing today.
 Heads of State or Government and Foreign Ministers at that meeting, particularly those of the permanent members of the Council, undertook to strengthen the work of the Organization and to make it effective in order to act rapidly, firmly and impartially.
 Mr. Cassar (Malta): Allow me at the outset to congratulate the President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
 This session of the Assembly is particularly fortunate in having the current President presiding over the discussion of this item, particularly in view of his experience as President of the Security Council in January 1990, and as representative of his country during Ce d'Ivoire's second term on the Council.
 Service on the Security Council is an onerous task, which Malta shared when it served during its term in 1983-1984.
 Any consideration of reform of the Security Council, be this in terms of composition or of the working methods, is surrounded by the legitimate concern that no proposed action should impair its existing vitality.
 Conscious as it is of the legitimate concern that no proposed action should impair the Council's existing vitality, my Government ascribes great importance to this debate for the future evolution of the United Nations.
 Under the able chairmanship of the President of the General Assembly, Ambassador Insanally, and his two Vice-Chairmen, the Open-ended Working Group established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 48/26 of 3 December 1993 held 22 meetings.
 primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security and agree that in carrying out its duty under this responsibility the Security Council acts on their behalf.
 My Government feels that equitable representation is primarily linked to a qualitative, rather than quantitative, change in the relationship between the Council and the rest of the United Nations membership.
 The present ongoing debate has already generated some beneficial developments in this regard.
 This practice particularly beneficial prior to the setting up of a peace-keeping operation could be of inspiration in fostering consultations with interested parties on other issues on which the Security Council may decide.
 Important as they are, these changes on their own do not resolve the wider question, that is, whether the rest of the United Nations membership should remain a passive, however well-informed, bystander at the Council's deliberations.
 There is good cause to believe that both a reasonable increase in the membership of the Security Council and an appraisal and review of the rights of its members would constitute positive measures of reform.
 The Security Council was expanded from 11 to 15 members in 1965 to reflect the growth in United Nations membership from the original 51 to 113.
 Malta believes that further expansion of the Security Council is now warranted in order to reflect today's United Nations membership of 184 States.
 At the same time, we believe, as do others, that one of the major strengths of the Security Council lies in its limited membership.
 For this reason, my delegation would support a prudent increase of not more than 10 seats.
 It is therefore in terms of the manner in which this inner circle, however constituted, is seen to act in response to the concerns of the wider membership that the most urgent measures relating to the Security Council must be contemplated.
 In this context, the relationship between the Security Council and the General Assembly assumes far-reaching importance.
 A revitalized General Assembly gains greater authority and credibility as it increasingly transforms itself into the effective organ through which the necessary collective input into the deliberations of other components of the United Nations system, not least the Security Council, could be made.
 a situation where the thinking of the Security Council could be in divergence with that of the General Assembly.
 If this happens, the effectiveness and the efficiency of the Security Council will be put into doubt.
 to propose appropriate ways and means to facilitate an in-depth discussion by the Assembly of matters contained in the reports submitted to it by the Security Council.
 The membership issue and the question of the status of different members on the Security Council have assumed predominance throughout our deliberations in the Open-ended Working Group.
 On the other hand, the introduction of new categories of membership is challenging, and, like any challenge, at one and the same time stimulates our institutional creativity but generates that sense of cautious awareness necessarily encountered when formulating new mechanisms.
 My Government is giving serious thought and consideration to the whole range of proposals submitted to date.
 We all are conscious of our grave responsibility.
 The reforms we will ultimately adopt will be as long-lasting as they are equitable and able to reflect a constantly evolving international reality.
 Like others, we have expressed the hope that through the full cooperation of all Member States, the Working Group will endeavour to conclude its work by next year in order to make its results coincide with the fiftieth anniversary.
 My delegation pledges its full cooperation in the endeavours of the Working Group.
 Our interest must remain that of ensuring prompt and effective action by the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security.
 His country, Ce d'Ivoire, where I had the privilege to serve, is for us Mauritanians a model of wisdom and moderation and a resolute champion in the promotion of the ideals of peace, solidarity and cooperation embodied in our Organization.
 In this context, we welcome the progress already made in this area under the chairmanship of President Essy's predecessor, Ambassador Samuel Insanally, with the assistance of Vice-Chairmen Wilhelm Breitenstein of Finland and Chew Tai Soo of Singapore.
 Such continuity will no doubt make it possible for us to speed up our work and keep it on the right path.
 As always, Mauritania will make a positive contribution to our common endeavour.
 In view of the changes that have taken place in our governing bodies over recent years, the Security Council should not be excluded from the modifications made necessary by the new international situation.
 This is why we have always supported and will continue to support efforts aimed at both expanding the Council's membership so that it can reflect the realities of today's world and making it more able to deal effectively with the many challenges it faces.
 This is why the question of equitable representation is of crucial importance.
 Indeed, since the Council acts on behalf of the States Members of the Organization and its decisions are binding on them, it is essential that it be seen as an entity whose legitimacy, equity and credibility are beyond all doubt.
 Hence, enlarging the Council can only strengthen it by enabling it to respond effectively and appropriately to present-day realities.
 In this light, the Council should reflect all currents of thought and all geographical regions of the world.
 The membership of the Council is a key issue, but its operation and its methods of work are no less important; they, too, need to be adapted to new realities.
 In this context, we welcome the measures already agreed on concerning its methods of work, particularly the timely adoption and presentation of reports to the General Assembly.
 However, we believe that further work must be done to establish more effective cooperation and coordination with the General Assembly on a more solid and consistent basis, because the General Assembly is still the forum in which all States can freely and democratically express their views.
 The largest possible number of States must be able to participate in the decision-making process, and this also calls for greater transparency, which is always the foundation of democracy and accountability.
 Like the vast majority of Members of our Organization, my country subscribes to the idea of a broadly representative, transparent and democratic Security Council.
 This is why we believe it is essential for the Open-ended Working Group on this issue to continue its efforts to discharge the mandate entrusted to it under resolution 48/26, adopted at the General Assembly's last session.
 We hope that at the fiftieth session the Working Group will submit to us a detailed and comprehensive report that justifies our efforts.
 May our efforts meet with great success.
 Being a small country, we entrust our security and our very existence to the United Nations.
 We want to see it further strengthened and the spheres of its activities expanded.
 We believe that in this emerging new world order it is more necessary than ever that the United Nations be capable of fulfilling the role entrusted to it by the Charter as the guarantor of peace, security and social justice in the world.
 In the context of greater transparency in the Security Council's decision-making processes, various measures have been suggested.
 For we should not forget that, under the prevailing conditions and procedures, inadequate transparency has led to bitter experiences, to say the least, for many, including my country.
 We look forward to the intensification of these discussions during the present session.
 We believe that any enlargement must take into consideration equitable geographical representation as well as the need to increase the transparency of its work and I repeat its accountability to the wider membership.
 While the matter of increase in the membership of the Security Council is pressing, final decisions as to its enlargement must be carefully weighed and fully debated.
 Any hasty treatment of this most serious subject will not provide a just solution to this issue.
 The reform and expansion of the Security Council should include measures geared to reforming its working methods and procedures.
 Genuine adherence to and a proven record in upholding the provisions and promoting the principles of the Charter should be a determining factor in the whole process.
 In conclusion, may I also recall the words of President Clerides before this body on 3 October:
 We hope that the opinions expressed here will be useful to the Open-ended Working Group of the General Assembly created for this issue when it resumes its work in January next year.
 In 1994, the Working Group has held a useful albeit general exchange of views under the wise and capable leadership of Ambassador Samuel Insanally, Permanent Representative of Guyana, and the Permanent Representatives of Singapore and Finland, whom we thank for a job well done.
 We feel that it is nevertheless appropriate to outline some clarifications of Cuba's position on this issue.
 Cuba considers that the necessary restructuring of the Security Council has a variety of closely interwoven aspects which are part and parcel of the same comprehensive process.
 In this context, we fully share the view of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries that any predetermined selection that excludes non-aligned and other developing countries would be unacceptable.
 That some regions are over-represented in the Security Council while others are under-represented is without question detrimental to the interests of the Council itself and to the Council's authority and credibility.
 Increasing the Council's representativeness would lend it greater legitimacy.
 As part of the same negotiating package, we must also take account of the question of the Council's working methods and procedures.
 In that way, the Council would not only be responding adequately to the continued appeals for transparency increasingly voiced in this Organization, but would also be improving the Council's image in the eyes of the international community and increasing its effectiveness by making its decisions more legitimate and credible.
 We recognize that in the past two years measures have been taken to improve the level of information available to States non-members of the Council, but much remains to be done.
 In our view, these should be duly taken into account in this process of restructuring the Council.
 Of course, a salient feature of the Council's procedures is the question of the anachronistic veto, whether exercised openly or covertly.
 My country's position on this issue is very well known and I will not repeat it here.
 As I said before, the Charter provisions regulating the relationship between the Security Council and the General Assembly should be fully restored; the leading role of the Assembly should be recognized.
 In this context, we must refer to the annual report of the Security Council and how it should be presented, an issue to which the non-aligned countries have repeatedly referred and which we shall address later in the session when the subject is dealt with at the session.
 Nor can we ignore the provisions of the Charter that allow the General Assembly to make recommendations to the Council regarding its structure and methods of operation.
 This has been a brief summary of my country's position on this item; these are in full accord with those endorsed by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
 We are ready to continue working in the Assembly's Open-ended Working Group, and I assure members that we will spare no effort to reach consensus solutions reflecting the vital interest of the international community in making the Security Council as democratic as possible.
 Mr. Nobilo (Croatia): I take this opportunity to convey my delegation's deep appreciation to Ambassador Samuel Insanally, who, as President of the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session, led the Working Group on this item, and to the Vice-Chairmen of the Working Group, Ambassador Breitenstein and Ambassador Chew.
 Thanks to their wise leadership, we have made great advances on this subject.
 As we approach the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, it is only appropriate that we should intensify our analysis of the functioning of the United Nations and seriously consider possible reforms with a view to improving its work.
 In this regard, the present debate concerning the question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council, and related matters, is timely and pertinent.
 Serious consideration should be given to granting permanent member status to one or more of these countries or to establishing a system whereby certain regionally influential States should be allowed to sit in the Security Council more often.
 It is obvious that the Security Council, regardless of its size, may be inefficient if there is no political will to make important decisions or if action is blocked by a veto or threatened veto by one or more of its permanent members.
 However, practical experience leads us to conclude that any large increase in the membership of the Council could lead to inefficiency in its work by overloading it with the ballast of oversized bureaucracy.
 A better method of communicating information on the deliberations in the informal consultations should be devised.
 My delegation also fully agrees that there is a need for greater consultation by the Security Council with troop-contributing countries, with third countries affected by sanctions and with States situated in regions experiencing conflict.
 However, we also wish to stress the need for greater consultations by the Council with troop-hosting States that is, States which have allowed United Nations peace-keeping forces on their territory as these are among the States which are most affected by Council decisions.
 The Republic of Croatia is situated in a crisis region which has so far been the source of more than 70 Security Council resolutions all in the last three years.
 Yet many of these resolutions have not been implemented or have only been partially implemented.
 We wish to stress that for the Security Council to be effective it must ensure that its resolutions are fully implemented not only in our region, but in general.
 I wish to add a few brief comments.
 First, may I convey my delegation's congratulations to Ambassadors Insanally, Breitenstein and Chew, the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen respectively of the Working Group established by the General Assembly to address this question.
 We hope that during this session we can build consensus on the fundamental issues so that the decisions taken at the end of the negotiating process may receive the support of all delegations.
 The practice of holding informal consultations behind closed door tends to diminish trust in the activities of the Council.
 As part of this endeavour to improve the Council's procedures, it is essential to address the question of the veto, a mechanism that we have repeatedly repudiated as anti-democratic.
 I refer members to document A/48/264 at page 36.
 Other delegations have already discussed in detail the historical factors underlying the adoption of that practice and the reasons that now prompt us to restrict it and eventually abolish it.
 It is a tradition that regards law as the basis for relations between States.
 Thus we are concerned at the trend that has developed in practice in the Council of widening, at its discretion, the powers vested in it by the Charter.
 The argument that the Council is a political body cannot exempt it from adhering to the norms of international law, particularly now when there is an increasing number of inter-State conflicts and many changes on the world scene.
 For this reason Ecuador is inclined to favour the proposals that the Security Council should act under constitutional control, in conformity with the mechanisms that are regarded as appropriate.
 These aspirations should be considered in the context of the need to respect equitable geographical distribution for all regions and the imbalance that currently exists in favour of one region, both among the permanent and among the non-permanent members.
 My delegation is extremely flexible in this regard and has considered with interest the alternative proposals presented by various delegations, for example Italy, which we believe can pave the way to the desired consensus.
 Ecuador believes that the necessary reorganization of the Council cannot be carried out simply by increasing the number of its permanent or non-permanent members.
 We welcome the recommendation that the Open-ended Working Group continue its work, taking into account views expressed at the forty-ninth session, and submit a report to the General Assembly before the end of the session.
 Over the past year we have entered into a sustained process of dialogue and discussion on a progressively substantive basis, highlighting the importance attached by Member States to this issue.
 Since then, follow-up discussions in June, the non-paper of the President of the General Assembly, views expressed by Indonesia as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, and statements by individual countries at the forty-ninth session have all provided a considered body of opinion on this subject-matter.
 Bangladesh's viewpoints have also been articulated in the course of this exercise.
 First and foremost, there is palpable recognition of the need for change in the Security Council to make it conform to a radically transformed world community and world situation.
 The approach, in our opinion, must be holistic and comprehensive in nature, touching on both its membership and its mandate.
 Secondly, there seems to be a universal convergence of views that the membership of the Council should be enlarged.
 We are confronted with balancing conflicting principles touching on the sovereign equality of Member States and the democratization of the United Nations, and the Non-Aligned Movement's considered position opposed to the perpetuation of current inequalities through the creation of new centres of privilege.
 Indeed the Non-Aligned Movement's position on the Council's decision-making process has been consistently directed at questioning the continued relevance of the veto, its possible abolition or at least the imposition of restrictions on its use.
 Bangladesh believes that the continued privileged status of permanent members is a matter of concern and that the objective should be to focus on limiting or removing this preserve over time.
 A major factor is that any such recognition as a permanent member must be achieved in conformity with the Charter and through consensus and the agreement of all Member States.
 On broader issues, there is a wide convergence of views on improving the working methods and procedures of the Council, including institutional competence, transparency, accountability, efficiency, responsiveness and timely and well-informed decision-making consistent with the support of all Member States.
 The positions of delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records.
 May I also remind delegations that, again in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
 The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report (A/49/503).
 May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
 The draft decision was adopted.
 The President (interpretation from French): I should like to consult delegations on the proposed format regarding the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, to be held on Thursday, 20 October 1994, in the morning.
 Next, the Assembly would hear statements by the Chairmen of the five regional groups and by the representative of the host country, as decided by the Assembly at its 3rd meeting, on 23 September 1994, regarding observances and commemorative meetings.
 I understand that interested delegations will submit a draft resolution in advance of the meeting for consideration on that date.
 May I take it that the Assembly approves of this format?
 The President (interpretation from French): I should like to request delegations to cooperate by making an effort to keep their statements under the 15-minute limit, as decided by the Assembly.
 The President (interpretation from French): I should like to seek the cooperation of delegations on the matter of punctuality.
 I remind delegations that punctuality is of the utmost importance in ensuring the effective and orderly organization of the work of the Assembly and in achieving economies for the United Nations.
 I strongly endorse the practical suggestions made at previous sessions that each delegation designate someone to be present at the scheduled time.
 I genuinely hope that all delegations will cooperate.
 The President (interpretation from French): Before calling on the first speaker I should like to inform the Assembly that the representative of Nigeria has expressed a desire to participate in the debate on this item.
 I see none.
 Nigeria is therefore included in the list.
 Bulgaria shares the opinion that the ongoing discussion on reform of the Security Council in the framework of the Open-ended Group is highly constructive and substantive.
 It is our strong belief that the new spirit of cooperation prevailing in the international community will make it possible to reach consensus solutions, enabling the Security Council to meet the challenges of the new times in the most effective and efficient way.
 We are of the opinion that this balance could be achieved if the Council were enlarged to a number in the low twenties.
 In practical terms, this would mean ensuring that States that carry considerable weight in international political and economic life - for example, Germany and Japan - as well as other countries that are influential in regional or global terms, could assume the responsibility of permanent status in the Council.
 An additional non-permanent seat should be allocated to the Eastern European Group.
 In this connection, it is appropriate to remind representatives that this regional group has exactly doubled its membership since the latest enlargement of the Council in 1965, while the membership of the United Nations over the same period has increased from 113 to 184.
 We welcome the Council's recent steps to improve its working methods - steps intended to increase transparency and to secure stronger involvement by non-member States.
 This momentum should be maintained through mechanisms designed to take into account, at an early stage of the decision-making process, the positions of neighbouring countries and of other interested States.
 The question of possible contributions by regional organizations, under appropriate arrangements, should also be taken into account.
 The need for such consultations is felt most strongly when economic sanctions and similar preventive and enforcement measures are being considered.
 This process should also include an advance detailed evaluation of any negative effects on the economies of neighbouring countries and should define the ways and means of dealing with them.
 Regular consultations with troop contributors and other States concerned should be institutionalized as a component of the decision-making process on peace-keeping operations, especially when the Council is considering changes in their mandates and composition.
 In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm my country's readiness to continue to contribute actively to the important process of adapting the Organization to the new challenges confronting it, of which the reform of the Security Council is a major element.
 Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia): My delegation fully associates itself with the statement delivered earlier on this agenda item by the representative of Indonesia, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and endorses the points raised therein.
 We believe that the Open-ended Working Group did a commendable job over the last year, considering the sensitive and delicate nature of the issues discussed.
 A great number of issues were covered and even more ideas exchanged during the meetings of the Open-ended Working Group.
 With the invaluable support of the Secretariat, the Chairman produced several papers outlining the positions of States, points on which there was convergence of views and others on which there was disagreement.
 By and large, the Working Group succeeded, in our view, in accumulating a wealth of ideas on how to approach and execute this centrally important task of ensuring equitable representation on and an increase in the membership of the Security Council.
 None the less, the report (A/48/47) of the Open-ended Working Group to the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly reflects neither the lively discussion that took place in the Group's meetings nor the wealth of proposals and ideas submitted by the delegations.
 A mere enlargement of the Council by a few seats without adequate improvements in its working methods and procedures will not suffice.
 We understand full well that an expanded Council should, by necessity, reflect the emergence of new important actors on the international scene, such as Japan and Germany.
 We feel that a 25-26 strong membership could make the Council a body well representative of the world community and yet small enough to act quickly and efficiently.
 More importantly, however, we must secure a proper and fair distribution of seats within the regional groups so that every State, regardless of its size and resources, would have a fair chance to serve its term in the Council and contribute to the common cause.
 The idea of introducing a mechanism of constituencies in the Security Council merits further consideration, as it would facilitate proper representation of small- and medium-size States in the Council and, above all, help provide greater transparency, accountability and representativeness in its work.
 We share the position of many delegations that in the long run the veto prerogative should be abolished altogether as an undemocratic institution running contrary to the underlying principle of sovereign equality of Member States.
 In this context, the option of not granting the right to veto to the new permanent members in the restructured Security Council would, in our opinion, be a logical first step towards the abolishment of this institution.
 Here I wish to reiterate our firm belief that the rule of obligatory abstention in the Security Council, contained in Article 27 (3) of the Charter, should be revived in unequivocal terms, and ways should be found to ensure that this rule is adhered to in the restructured Council.
 We hope that on the basis of its work in 1994 the Working Group will be able to engage in an in-depth discussion of the various proposals and ideas before it with a view to reaching a balanced consensus sooner rather than later.
 Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Almost one year has elapsed since the General Assembly decided to create, through resolution 48/26, an Open-ended Working Group to consider all aspects of the question of the possible increase in the membership of the Security Council and related matters.
 The position of the Argentine Government, as already expressed in its response to the request of the Secretary-General (A/48/264), was recently reiterated in the statement made by President Carlos Menem on Tuesday, 27 September 1994, in the Assembly.
 The primary objective of this process should be the strengthening of the Security Council by achieving greater effectiveness and transparency in its functioning and making it more representative of the States Members of the United Nations.
 It would also avoid causing regional imbalances that might unjustifiably alter the historical system whereby some States traditionally alternate their membership of the Council, as could be precisely the case of the Argentine Republic.
 Fifthly, greater transparency and representativeness of the Security Council could be achieved by better participation of the members on issues that are of specific interest to them.
 This could be done in two ways; first, by means of greater procedural transparency in the work of the Council, especially in informal consultations, and, secondly by establishing mechanisms that would allow for a relationship between the Members of the United Nations and the Security Council.
 It encourages us to pursue it.
 Many aspects of this subject that have been discussed in our Working Group do not require amending the Charter of the United Nations.
 Many of those aspects, which could be considered as procedural but which have to do with the transparency and representativeness of the Security Council, are within the Council's own competence.
 In the last two years many changes have been introduced which have benefited the membership at large.
 However, we believe that there is still much progress to be made.
 This first stage of the Working Group's activity should enable us to draw certain conclusions that would permit this process to continue effectively and usefully.
 To that end, let me refer to two points: first, the purpose of our future discussion and, secondly, the way to achieve that purpose.
 Regarding the purpose of our discussion, we feel that we ought to focus on those points where there is clear-cut consensus - I repeat, clear-cut consensus - on the part of the membership.
 With respect to the course of action to be followed, my delegation supports extending the mandate of the Working Group, preferably under your chairmanship, Mr. President, and with the same Vice-Chairmen.
 As far as the modalities are concerned, we believe that, to ensure transparency and effectiveness, a proper balance must be struck between plenary meetings, and consultations in smaller groups.
 Mr. Khani (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): The General Assembly has been considering the item entitled "Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council" since its thirty-fourth session.
 With the approaching fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations, significant questions are bound to be asked about the achievements of this Organization and the obstacles it still faces.
 Such questions arise from the fact that the present composition of the Council, which took shape in the wake of the Second World War, has become rather anachronistic at a time when the Organization's membership is fourfold what it was at the time of its inception.
 Many regional groups and Member States have worked diligently on this matter and have focused on the Council's decision-making procedures which must be studied as an integral part of an overall plan.
 The Security Council is the only United Nations body whose criteria for membership were set out in the Charter.
 The countries of the Mon-aligned Movement have always emphasized the need for democratizing international relations and have worked diligently for the achievement of the Movement's goals of equitable representation and increased Security Council membership.
 My delegation believes that the Security Council should be reformed and restructured in response to the major changes that have taken place on the international arena and that such reform and restructuring should include a comprehensive review of the Council's methods of work and decision-making procedures.
 To face up to the challenges inherent in such changes, there is a need for the cooperation of the entire international community if we are to look forward to a better future and ensure respect for the principles of sovereignty, democracy and transparency in decision-making.
 Mr. Tejera Paris (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): Venezuela has on four occasions had the privilege of being a member of the Security Council.
 The Council has made every effort to devote the required attention to these conflicts and has tried new, delicate and complicated solutions to some of them, sometimes stretching its powers to the limit.
 Its meetings were most useful in assessing existing prospects and in beginning to identify points of agreement.
 This expansion, which is unreservedly supported by Venezuela, must now be defined in terms of format and scope.
 Venezuela believes that any expansion of the Council should be guided by the principles of the sovereign equality of States and of equitable geographical representation, and, to this end, Venezuela supports the expansion of the number of non-permanent seats.
 The Government of Venezuela believes that any increase in the number of permanent seats must take into account the Latin American and Caribbean region, whose contributions to international peace and security are praiseworthy from whatever standpoint they are considered.
 The President of Venezuela referred explicitly to this issue in his statement before this Assembly on 30 September last.
 We have supported that principle since we became founding Members of the Organization in 1945.
 We believe that the conditions are ripe for reform in the political and institutional arena.
 We offer our full cooperation to this end.
 The President (interpretation from French): Before we continue our consideration of this item, I should like once again ask for the cooperation of States in being punctual.
 I must confess that during the general debate there were some delays in beginning our meetings.
 That was inevitable because of the large number of Heads of State and other officials visiting the Secretary-General and me.
 At any rate, it is my firm intention to begin our meetings at 10 a.m. and 3 p.m., respectively - not a minute later.
 Mr. Hayes (Ireland): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to personally renew the warm words of congratulation and welcome to you, as President of the General Assembly, that were expressed by my Minister in the general debate a few weeks ago.
 Last month he mentioned it as one of seven points on which he believed there should be priority action in our efforts to build a United Nations capable of meeting the challenges of the new era.
 Both then and last year he stressed that the Security Council should be more representative of the increased general membership, reflective of the changes in economic and political relations and more responsive to the needs of the general membership.
 That aim has been and will continue to be the guideline for our participation in the debate on this topic and in the deliberations in the Open-ended Working Group.
 The yardstick by which we assess any proposals made is whether we feel they contribute to the achievement of that aim.
 We do not intend in this plenary debate to engage in an examination of proposals.
 We do not believe that any delegation or group of delegations has, or would even claim to have, the ideal solution to this question.
 My delegation, of course, fully supports the decision adopted by consensus at the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly which noted the report of the Open-ended Working Group and approved the recommendation that the Group should continue its work during this session of the General Assembly.
 We intend to continue to contribute to that work to the best of our ability and in a fully cooperative manner.
 In speaking thus of procedural matters, we are assuming that the work will now move beyond the deliberative stage to a serious negotiating stage.
 Negotiation necessarily means addressing proposals in increasing detail.
 In this respect, it is helpful that some relatively detailed ideas have been placed before us by Italy and Australia.
 The non-paper prepared by the Working Group Chairman during the last session is also of assistance in moving towards more focused exchanges.
 We hope that the resumption of the work will feature, inter alia, responses to these documents and counter-proposals and that thus we will get down to serious negotiations.
 We believe that this subject is too important for the general well-being of the United Nations to defer that development any further.
 Finally, I would like to express our appreciation of the skill and industry of the members of the Bureau of the Working Group: Ambassador Insanally, Chairman, and Ambassadors Breitenstein and Chew, Vice-Chairmen.
 Their efforts have been the major contributing factor in the progress achieved so far, which we should not underestimate merely because of how far we still have to go.
 Mr. Sitaula (Nepal): I have the great honour and privilege to speak on the agenda item before us, which is of paramount importance to all delegations and to the United Nations as a whole.
 My delegation expresses its sincere appreciation to Ambassador Samuel R. Insanally of Guyana, President of the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session, for his personal initiative on the matter during his able stewardship as Chairman of the Open-ended Working Group.
 With the end of the cold war, the Security Council has become the important organ of decision-making and action on various international issues.
 The fundamental changes in international relations, together with the rearrangement of power relations in the post-cold-war world, have made it necessary to consider the role and composition of the Council.
 The new imbalance between the North and the South on various political and socio-economic issues is another of the reasons behind the argument for re-examining the composition and functioning of the Council.
 My delegation has actively participated in the discussion on this matter in the Working Group and has expressed its position on several occasions.
 We view this exercise as an endeavour to strengthen the effectiveness of the Security Council on the basis of equitable representation so that its decisions may have broad-based support and legitimacy.
 It is of fundamental importance, therefore, to explore every possibility to ensure that decisions of the Council represent the views of the general membership.
 These meetings drew attention in particular to the fact that the non-aligned and developing countries are underrepresented and that the composition of the Council does not reflect the universal character of the United Nations.
 This imbalance especially puts into question the legitimacy, equity and credibility of the Organization.
 At the same time, my delegation fully shares the view that due consideration should be given to the principle of equitable geographical representation in the restructuring and revitalization of the Council.
 In this context, we feel that the current exercise should not be limited to the enlargement of the membership, but that it should also consider a more comprehensive package of reforms in the working methods and procedures of the Council.
 We are happy to note that, during the deliberations in the Working Group, there was a broad convergence of views on greater transparency and on strengthening the relationship between the Council and the general membership.
 Nepal, as a significant troop-contributor to United Nations peace-keeping operations, feels that there is a need for a consultative mechanism of the Security Council with troop- contributing countries, especially when decisions are taken regarding the mandates of new peace-keeping operations and the revision or renewal of mission mandates.
 This practice would also help strengthen the relationship between the Council and the Assembly.
 Mr. Lamptey (Ghana): This being my first time at the rostrum, let me first congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly and on the able manner in which you have conducted its affairs so far.
 More important, the outbreak of conflicts in virtually all regions of the world, with the need for peace to be established and kept, has placed the Security Council in a critical position in world affairs.
 It is evident that the international political situation on which the Security Council was built is entirely different today.
 The composition and distribution of seats and the resultant powers enjoyed by members of the Security Council today are predicated upon certain factors which at the relevant point in history were defensible and justifiable.
 Although these arrangements were well-founded and have served us relatively well, it is the view of my delegation that the time has come when we should boldly rethink and rearrange things in such a way as to bring the Security Council into line with current changed circumstances.
 Mr. Sucharipa (Austria), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 Then in 1963, the membership having expanded to 162, the need was felt for an increase in the number of non-permanent members of the Security Council from 6 to 10 to reflect an equitable geographical representation.
 Now more than ever, with an expansion in membership to 184, it has become imperative that existing arrangements be reviewed.
 Furthermore, the Ghana delegation believes that permanent membership in the Security Council of the five major wartime allies, although well-founded then, has become obsolete.
 And if it is thought necessary to retain permanent membership of the Council, then new arrangements must be reached which will create a general sense of equality and global balance in an organ as vital as the Security Council.
 This is certainly a matter that needs to be discussed thoroughly if the reform is to promote equity.
 Ghana subscribes fully to the position collectively articulated by the African Group on this question.
 At the same time, we are aware of the varied positions assumed by other groups and countries.
 What is important to emphasize here is that, despite our call for the increase in the number of Security Council members to 25, the issue is not a quantitative one - it is a qualitative one.
 There could be many ways to achieve this objective and we should all be creative in this regard.
 We need a Security Council whose work is transparently reflective of all our common aspirations.
 The Russian Federation believes that our consideration of this item should be seen in the general context of adapting the United Nations to the political, economic, social and other realities of today's world.
 To its credit are a number of successful peace-keeping operations and very important decisions aimed at the prevention and settlement of conflicts and at strengthening security and stability in various parts of the world.
 A most cooperative relationship has developed among the members of the Security Council, which would have been unthinkable during the cold war, when the Security Council was frequently used not to search seriously search for solutions to pressing problems but to air ideological attitudes.
 We cannot permit the paralysis of a machinery that has been working in a well-adjusted and on the whole successful way.
 Last year, the Security Council itself took a number of practical steps along these lines.
 Decisions were taken within existing procedures enabling other Members of the United Nations to receive fuller, prompter information about the Council's activities and to convey their views to members of the Council.
 We believe that those useful efforts should be continued.
 It is essential that consensus measures be devised to preserve the Council's role as the central United Nations body bearing primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
 We are prepared to continue our active participation in the work of the Group, and are open to constructive cooperation with all Members of the United Nations on this important matter.
 There has been progress in areas under the second cluster of issues those dealing with improvements in the working methods of the Council.
 For this and for other reasons we are convinced that the discussion now needs to focus on concrete proposals if it is to serve the agreed objective of bringing about change.
 It will be through discussion and negotiation of concrete proposals that an emerging understanding of what is effective, realistic and equitable will emerge.
 In his statement to the Assembly on 3 October, the Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Gareth Evans, put some illustrative proposals on the table.
 First, there is agreement that the Council must be expanded.
 This agreement is recorded in the report of the Open-ended Working Group.
 Secondly, an expanded Security Council must be representative in order to maintain its perceived legitimacy and thus its future viability.
 For example, present geographical representation on the Council is unbalanced.
 Thirdly, it will be important that all apply rigorously the criteria and qualifications for Security Council membership elaborated in Article 23 of the Charter.
 In our view, seeking to elaborate criteria additional to those contained in Article 23 is likely to be an unproductive distraction from the main business of the Working Group and we would discourage travel down that path.
 Fourthly, an expanded Council must be effective and capable of responding quickly to the range of difficult situations with which the international community is being and can expect to be confronted - particularly deadly conflicts and massive human rights violations occurring within States.
 Fifthly, that expansion must be kept within strict numerical limits because, as is very widely recognized, there is a size beyond which the Council will not be able to function effectively.
 There appeared to be an emerging consensus in the Working Group that the number of members should not exceed 25.
 Sixthly, Australia would regard conferring the veto power on any new permanent member of the Council as inconsistent with its diminishing use in a more cooperative atmosphere of collective security decision-making.
 For these same reasons, we believe it would be appropriate to slightly dilute the veto power of the existing five permanent members by requiring two from their number to concur in its exercise.
 Senator Evans offered specific illustrative models in order to help focus the discussion of the General Assembly and the future work of the Working Group on the questions of composition and size and their relationship to equitable geographical representation.
 Our action expressed our belief that it is possible to move beyond the abstract into discussion and negotiations on concrete proposals and we encourage others to do the same.
 The models we submitted for consideration are set out in an attachment to our written statement that has been circulated to Members of the Assembly.
 The model that would most simply meet the legitimate aspirations of the largest States excluded at present from permanent membership of the Security Council - including Japan and Germany, whose claims we support - would involve the creation of five new permanent membership seats.
 Assuming the continuation of the existing regional groups, three new permanent members would come from Africa and Asia, one from the Group of Western European and Other States, and one from Latin America and the Caribbean.
 If, as seems possible, agreement on a simple model of this kind proves to be not easily reachable, it may be worth giving consideration to a more complex alternative model.
 We have in mind one which would no doubt, in practice, guarantee effective permanency for the largest States excluded at present from the council, including Japan and Germany.
 But it would at the same time give a greater degree of flexibility to the Council's structure, and greater opportunities for recognition of several other countries that have made a major contribution to the Organization.
 It might, for those reasons, be a model capable of commanding widespread support.
 It would make abundant sense, in our view, for the existing regional groups to be at the same time modified to reflect post-cold-war realities.
 That table also sets out how they might be distributed among the existing groups.
 These models give due consideration to the benefits of retaining an appropriate balance in the proportion of permanent to quasi-permanent or non-permanent members.
 While the Council's effectiveness is well served by having a core of members with lengthy experience, these models also rest on the healthy rotation of membership of countries, large and small, which would bring the full range of perspectives on international affairs to the work of the Council.
 Any changes such as those described in these models would require amendments to Articles 23, 27 and 108 of the Charter.
 We do not suggest that the models we have advanced are the only possible approaches.
 These or any such models lend themselves to various possible permutations and combinations.
 The United Nations time has come.
 It can become the Organization envisaged in its Charter.
 Agreement on a new Security Council would be a very important signal that the United Nations is fulfilling its promise.
 However, domination and subjugation on the globe still remain unchecked, and that is largely related to the existing inequitable international order and relationships.
 I note with satisfaction that efforts are being made to restructure the Security Council as part of measures aimed at correcting such inequality in international relationships.
 My delegation appreciates the progress made by the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council formed pursuant to General Assembly resolution 48/26 of 3 December 1993.
 During this period the United Nations membership has increased to 184 and noticeable changes in international relations have taken place.
 However, the developing countries are still not equally represented in the Security Council and are excluded from decision-making.
 We therefore support proposals to enlarge the membership of the Security Council that are aimed at allocating more seats to the developing countries.
 Thus, a proportionate number of permanent-member seats in the Security Council should be given to developing countries so that their views and interests can be represented in the Security Council.
 That would strengthen the Security Council by making it responsive and relevant to prevailing realities, and credible and effective.
 Japan is now pursuing a plan to become a military and nuclear Power while trying to cheat the world by paying only lip-service to apology and compensation for its past aggression and war crimes.
 For these reasons, in my view, it is premature to talk about the possibility of permanent membership for Japan on the Security Council and the deletion of the "enemy State" clauses in the United Nations Charter.
 In conclusion, I hope that the joint efforts and endeavours of many delegations will bring about realistic results in the discussion of this item at this meeting.
 Mr. Sychou (Belarus) (interpretation from Russian): The delegation of Belarus regards our current discussion on the question of equitable representation in the Security Council and the increase in its membership as a substantive stage on the way to resolving specific aspects of the problem.
 The organizational framework of this work could be provided by the unofficial consultations and official meetings of the Open-ended Working Group under the guidance of the President of the last session of the Assembly and his two deputies, the distinguished representatives of Finland and Singapore.
 Figuratively speaking, we should say that at this stage of the discussion we have to synchronize our watches in order to coordinate our efforts to find ways and means of improving the Security Council's activities under changed circumstances.
 In this context I would like to recall the essence of what the position of Belarus has been, as revealed in the general political discussion.
 First, if the United Nations is to continue to work effectively, there must be far-reaching reform of its main bodies, including the Security Council.
 Secondly, the representation of countries and regions in the Security Council should take more fully into account the interests of all groups of countries, including the Eastern European Group.
 Thirdly, any reform of the Security Council should not detract from its role as the body that bears the main responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, which is something that we all need, particularly small States Members of the United Nations.
 First, as long as, in the General Assembly, there are five regional groups, Belarus cannot accept the concept of reforming the Security Council on the basis of a bipolar view of the world along North-South lines or among the four regional continental groups.
 Achieving this is possible only if we are completely clear about the future membership of the five regional groups in the General Assembly.
 Thirdly, any formula for altering the membership and configuration of the Security Council must not fail to take into account the legitimate national and general interests of States Members of each of the five regional groups.
 Naturally, this is equally true of the Group of Eastern European States, whose number, as you know, has considerably increased over recent years as a result of the formation of new independent States.
 Fourthly, achieving consensus on many of the specific problems related to the reform of the Security Council is being held up by difficulties in resolving the procedures and the current practices of having a prior selection of candidates within certain existing regional groups of the General Assembly.
 Therefore, our delegation supports the idea of interregional agreements on the basis of rotation, putting forward candidacies for the rotational seats in the Security Council regardless of the existing or future constitution of its permanent membership and of their distribution among regions or continents.
 Mr. Muthaura (Kenya): The agenda item before us, "Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and related matters," is an issue of great interest to the general membership of the Organization.
 Strong arguments were advanced at the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly and deeper elaborations of those arguments have been amply discussed in the Assembly's Open-Ended Working Group, whose summary report has been submitted to us.
 We, however, wish to highlight a few points.
 Such a responsibility bestows upon the Council's members, both individually and collectively, the heavy duty of the effective management of international conflicts and situations that threaten international peace and security, to be carried out on behalf of the entire membership of the Organization.
 Needless to say, this obligation should be impartially applicable, whether the threat is targeted against small States or big States.
 It is also important for the Assembly to appreciate that threats to international peace and security have important geographical dimensions that cannot be ignored as we deliberate Security Council reform.
 Almost invariably, neighbouring countries bear the heaviest burden of the repercussions of conflicts, either in terms of refugees and the overflow of insecurity or in terms of the enforcement measures taken by the Council, such as sanctions.
 This brings me to the issue of equitable regional representation in the Security Council. I have already stressed the importance of the geographical dimension with regard to threats to international peace and security.
 Accordingly, it is in the interests of the Council that all regions be equitably represented by both the permanent and non-permanent membership of the Council.
 A better-informed Council would naturally make more objective and popular decisions on behalf of the general membership of the Organization.
 Not only should the Council's decision-making be objective, it should be seen to be objective, and in the interest of the general membership.
 This is one of the reasons why a proposal has been made to expand the number of permanent seats to include a few other world Powers that have emerged since the Organization was founded.
 It would be of great significance if the notion of permanency were qualified in the reformed Security Council to make possible a review of the membership of permanent seats after a decade or two.
 In this regard, seats allocated for regional representation should be filled by election by the General Assembly on the basis of regional nominations.
 The non-permanent seats on the Security Council, which currently stand at 10, are too few for the remaining 179 Member States of the United Nations.
 It is imperative, therefore, that the number be correspondingly increased, taking into account the Charter requirement for equitable geographical distribution.
 Many delegations have expressed the view that a Security Council of 25 members would, at present, be a realistic option.
 We subscribe to that view, taking into account the arguments that have been presented on the need to ensure legitimacy, equitable regional representation and proportionate representation of the general membership.
 Among those 25 seats it is possible to negotiate the distribution of both permanent and non-permanent seats to correct the imbalance created by history, particularly with regard to the distribution of the permanent seats on the Security Council.
 During the discussions of the Open-ended Working Group there was general agreement that transparency in the working methods of the Security Council and the involvement of countries contributing troops to peace-keeping activities, as well as other, closely associated countries, in the Council's informal consultations would enhance that body's effectiveness.
 We need not elaborate on the need to democratize the decision-making process in the Council, including the need to do away with the power of the veto, the most undemocratic decision-making method inscribed - unfortunately - in the Charter.
 We endorse the proposal by the Open-ended Working Group on the renewal of its mandate to enable it to complete its task.
 It is our hope that the Working Group will utilize the unique opportunity available on the eve of the Organization's fiftieth anniversary to facilitate consensus on this vital issue of Security Council reform.
 Finally, I wish to take this opportunity to express my delegation's appreciation to Ambassador Samuel Insanally of Guyana, President of the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session, who so ably steered the Open-ended Working Group.
 We also wish to commend his two Vice-Chairmen, Ambassador Wilhelm Breitenstein of Finland and Ambassador Chew Tai Soo of Singapore for their intellectual and diplomatic skills and for dedicating many long hours to ensuring that the Working Group made progress.
 I echo those sentiments and pledge my delegation's full support and cooperation towards the successful discharge of his mandate.
 Our commendation is due also to the two Vice-Chairmen, Ambassadors Chew Tai Soo of Singapore and Wilhelm Breitenstein of Finland.
 The Organization of African Unity (OAU) has issued an African common position, and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has issued declarations and communiqu\x{5ee5} stating its position on the issues currently before us.
 Zimbabwe fully supports and subscribes to these collective positions on the restructuring and reorganization of the Security Council.
 In an increasingly turbulent world the Council is being called upon to act under increasingly delicate and complex circumstances.
 Hence, if it is to have greater efficiency and effectiveness it needs to wield greater legitimacy, moral authority and credibility.
 This is possible only in circumstances of greater transparency and accountability on the part of the Council.
 In the absence of democracy and equitable representativeness, there can be no transparency or accountability.
 Thus any Security Council reform must begin on the premise that the democratic ethic that is now a cause for celebration within our national borders should find expression at the international level too.
 In this respect, the notion of absolute permanent membership of the Security Council and the attendant veto should now be regarded as relics of a bygone era and should therefore be abolished.
 Is it not the greatest irony of our times that those who assiduously resist the democratization of relations between nations are the most vocal in insisting on democratic governance within nations?
 Therefore, any transitional arrangements arrived at must seriously address the imbalances and injustices of existing arrangements.
 Nevertheless, for their periods on the Council they should enjoy the same rights and privileges, including the veto, as the existing permanent members.
 The principle of the consent of the governed is paramount.
 We believe that while the institution of the veto lasts, its use should be circumscribed so as to prevent its unilateral use to promote or protect narrow national interests.
 We take note of the limited reforms introduced by the Security Council in recent months.
 Several representatives have already alluded to these, and we shall not labour the point.
 However, my delegation believes that these cosmetic reforms should not be seen as substitutes for the more fundamental change that we seek.
 Towards the conclusion of the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly some members suggested in the Working Group that perhaps we needed to formalize the limited changes in working methods that the Security Council has been pressured into introducing.
 We fear that formalization of otherwise superficial changes could only foster a false sense of accomplishment.
 Our approach should be that of a comprehensive package - a package that will ensure the creation of a transparent, representative and democratic Security Council.
 My delegation welcomed the establishment of the Open-ended Working Group on the question before us, and I wish to thank its Chairman, Ambassador Insanally and the Vice-Chairmen, Ambassadors Breitenstein and Chew, for their tireless efforts and laudable contributions in this regard.
 The Group's report was extremely short because, despite a convergence of views on many matters, consensus was still far away.
 Nevertheless, on one point all States Members are agreed: that the Security Council should be enlarged to some extent.
 We hope that during this session of the General Assembly the Open-ended Working Group will be able to narrow the differences that still exist and enhance the convergence so that it can come forward with more concrete proposals.
 Let me briefly repeat the seven most important points for the record.
 Second, as changes in the composition of the Council will require amendments to the Charter, it is logical and desirable that reform of the Council should have the broadest possible support among Member States.
 Third, a careful balance must be struck between the effectiveness of the Council and the necessity to enhance its representative character.
 We hope that consensus can be reached on a total number of seats somewhere in the low twenties.
 "the contribution of Members of the United Nations to the maintenance of international peace and security and to the other purposes of the Organization, and also to equitable geographical distribution."
 Fifth, these consequently, should be the criteria for new membership.
 Without excluding other new members, my country is therefore in favour of the admission of Germany and Japan as permanent members of the Security Council.
 Seventh, enhanced transparency and closer coordination between the Security Council and the United Nations membership at large is of extreme importance.
 I wish to stress in this regard the urgent need for an improved flow of information to and consultation with countries participating in peace-keeping operations.
 The Assembly can count on my delegation's cooperation in finding lasting, equitable and fair solutions that will help the Security Council carry out its important and challenging mandate in an ever- more-complex global context.
 In the consideration of this agenda item, my country will be guided by a desire to increase the effectiveness, efficiency, credibility and legitimacy of the Security Council in the interest of all United Nations Member States.
 Mr. Abiola (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation welcomes the opportunity to participate in this debate on the important question of equitable representation on and increase in membership of the Security Council.
 This is a compelling reason why the restructuring of the Council must remain of primary interest and concern.
 In this regard, Member States provided viewpoints which enabled the Open-ended Working Group, established by the General Assembly at the forty-eighth session, to begin to address substantively the issues relating to the restructuring of the Council.
 The outcome of the efforts exerted thus far reveals the complexity and challenges of the review process.
 It also testifies to the active interest of all Member States on the subject.
 He was ably assisted by the Ambassadors of Finland and Singapore.
 In considering the question of representation and an increase in the membership of the Council, one cannot but reiterate the singular absence of African representation in the permanent membership of the Council, despite the continent's 53 Member States.
 As to the specific question of number, my delegation is flexible but believes that, whatever final figure is reached, it must be consistent with the principle of representativeness and equitable geographical distribution.
 My delegation does not believe that we should create a status subordinate to that of permanent member, nor do we support the idea of rotating permanent seats.
 In other words, we recognize and advocate the continuance of the present arrangement of permanent and non-permanent membership only.
 All permanent members should enjoy the same status and privileges and assume the responsibilities incumbent on membership.
 It is our opinion that the criteria for permanent membership on the Council should include such considerations as a country's population, its capacity to contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security, and its track record, assessed over a period of time, in international peace-keeping and peace-making efforts.
 Enough concern has been expressed about the modalities for bringing these changes into effect, including that of amending the relevant provisions of the Charter.
 My delegation believes that consideration of these modalities should not be used as obstacles to proceeding with the review.
 Since it has been possible to amend the Charter on previous occasions, we believe that a subsequent review can adopt a similar procedure.
 It is the hope of my delegation that at the current session an appropriate resolution will be adopted, enabling the Open-ended Working Group to continue its consideration of the question with a view to reaching an early conclusion.
 We urge Member States to show flexibility in the interest of international peace and security and of equity and justice.
 "to establish an Open-ended Working Group to consider all aspects of the question of increase in the membership of the Security Council, and other matters related to the Security Council" (para. 1).
 Having been formally established by the General Assembly, the Working Group is a subsidiary organ of the Assembly.
 The Working Group is therefore in a position to continue its work in due course, at a date to be established by mutual agreement following consultations.
 We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of agenda item 33.
 The President (interpretation from French): Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate on this item be closed today at noon.
 The President (interpretation from French): I therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in the debate on this item to place their names on the list as soon as possible.
 Mr. Blix (Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency): In 1995 it will be 50 years since the founding of the United Nations and 25 years since the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) entered into force.
 For the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), these anniversaries provide occasions to review its role in the United Nations system and under the NPT, and to identify new needs and new challenges.
 It is striking that the first resolution ever adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations, in 1946, dealt with "the problems raised by the discovery of atomic energy" (resolution 1(I)), preambular paragraph).
 Also mentioned at that early stage was the need for effective safeguards by way of inspection and for exchange of scientific information.
 The Agency developed the safeguards system and it helped to transfer nuclear science and technology relevant to agriculture, medicine, industry and electricity generation.
 Since the Chernobyl accident in 1986, a major challenge for the IAEA has been to develop and consolidate international rules and measures relating to nuclear safety and radiation protection into a global nuclear safety regime.
 After the discovery of clandestine nuclear activities in Iraq in 1991, another great challenge has been to strengthen the safeguards system so as to reduce the risk that any nuclear activity which should have been declared, remains undetected.
 With the end of the cold war, new opportunities for nuclear disarmament and arms control have opened up.
 As a result, there are new expectations and demands on the IAEA in the area of verification.
 Similarly, the goals of sustainable development and protection of the global environment mean new tasks and challenges for the IAEA.
 I shall now develop these themes, beginning with the issue of non-proliferation.
 It would be wise to build on this experience in the future.
 In these days of electronic communications, close and continuous liaison between Vienna and New York is not difficult.
 Between the Director General of the IAEA and the Secretary-General of the United Nations there is already a secure and direct communications link, and if the Security Council so wished I am sure informal briefings by the IAEA by closed-circuit television could be arranged.
 As the non-proliferation regime moves further towards universality and as nuclear disarmament results in reductions in nuclear arsenals, it becomes increasingly important that commitments made under the NPT and other nuclear-related agreements be fully respected.
 I shall now discuss IAEA verification activities in specific areas, beginning with Iraq.
 Since May 1991 the IAEA has carried out 26 inspection missions in Iraq under the mandate of Security Council resolution 687 (1991).
 Based on these inspections and the analysis of document samples, procurement data and other information, the course of Iraq's clandestine nuclear-weapons programme has been thoroughly investigated and charted.
 Monitoring and verification measures will continue to evolve as technical needs arise and advanced technologies become available.
 A mechanism for monitoring future sales and supplies of designated items to Iraq has been jointly developed with the United Nations Special Commission in consultation with the Security Council's Committee on sanctions against Iraq.
 Once approved by the Council, this mechanism will form an integral part of the ongoing monitoring and verification system.
 In the Democratic People's Republic of Korea the IAEA has found evidence suggesting the existence of some nuclear material - plutonium - that has not been reported by that country to the Agency.
 No progress has been made in the Agency's consequent effort to secure access to additional information and locations, as requested by the Agency in 1993.
 Further, the problem has been aggravated by the discharge of spent fuel from the 5-megawatt experimental nuclear power reactor without the appropriate safeguards measures requested by the Agency.
 Valuable information about the history of the spent fuel was thereby irretrievably lost.
 However, this does not affect its obligations under the Non-Proliferation Treaty and under the safeguards agreement with the IAEA.
 An important development in the past year was the successful negotiation of comprehensive safeguards agreements with newly independent States of the former Soviet Union having significant nuclear facilities.
 Ukraine, although not yet an NPT party, has also signed a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the Agency, pledging that all nuclear material under its control will be used only for peaceful purposes.
 In Latin America, Argentina, Brazil and Chile have ratified the Tlatelolco Treaty for the denuclearization of Latin America, and Cuba has recently declared that it intends to adhere to the Treaty.
 We can therefore expect that the Treaty will soon enter into force and that the IAEA will apply comprehensive safeguards in the entire Latin American region.
 South Africa's roll-back from the possession of nuclear weapons to non-nuclear-weapon status and its accession to the NPT constitute a major development.
 The IAEA has carried out a great number of safeguards missions to South Africa under the NPT safeguards agreement since October 1991.
 After thorough investigation, the Agency has found no reason to doubt the veracity of South Africa's initial declaration of nuclear material.
 Full membership rights in the IAEA have now been restored to South Africa.
 Another recent positive development in Africa is the declaration by Algeria of its intention to accede to the NPT.
 The creation of the African nuclear-weapon-free zone should now be at hand.
 The IAEA has continued to assist the African States in their efforts towards this end.
 I have personally pursued consultations with a number of States in the Middle East about the early application of Agency safeguards to all relevant activities in the region.
 Further, in the context of the Middle East peace negotiations, the Agency has provided expert assistance to the participants in the Multilateral Working Group on Arms Control and Regional Security.
 Lastly, the Agency organized in 1993 a workshop for experts from Middle East countries on the modalities for the application of safeguards in the Middle East region.
 As a follow-up, and in the context of the Multilateral Working Group, a visit by representatives of Middle East States was arranged to a nuclear power plant in Western Europe.
 The purpose of this visit was to demonstrate how regional verification activities can complement international verification efforts.
 Following the discovery in Iraq of undeclared nuclear material, installations and activities, considerable efforts have been made in the IAEA to strengthen the Agency's detection capability.
 Some measures have already been introduced, such as the request for the early provision of design information on nuclear installations and for reporting on the export and import of nuclear material and specified equipment and non-nuclear material over and above the reporting requirements of safeguards agreements.
 Furthermore, a comprehensive programme to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the safeguards system is being developed for submission to the Board of Governors in March 1995.
 It is designed to strengthen the Agency's access to information and access to sites for inspection.
 It will include innovations in detection techniques and technologies, such as environmental monitoring, as well as recommendations to remove various restrictions imposed by States on inspections.
 It is paradoxical, for instance, that States that have accepted international inspection in order to demonstrate their openness and compliance with non-proliferation commitments, still demand that inspectors apply for visas before coming.
 Safeguards are not a form of intrusion on States' sovereignty, but, rather, an opportunity for States to demonstrate their compliance with international obligations.
 Safeguards are an institutionalized means of nuclear transparency to create confidence.
 Let me now briefly describe the IAEA's recent engagement in some verification issues that go beyond our traditional safeguards activities.
 Mr. Arzoumanian (Armenia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 As a result of the current dismantling of nuclear weapons by the United States and Russia and the ongoing reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel in several countries, substantial quantities of plutonium and high enriched uranium (HEU) are recovered.
 On the issue of fissionable material from dismantled weapons, President Clinton and President Yeltsin agreed in January 1994 to establish a joint working group to consider, inter alia:
 "steps to ensure the transparency and irreversibility of the process of reduction of nuclear weapons, including the possibility of putting a portion of the fissionable material under IAEA safeguards".
 I can report to the Assembly that, for its part, the United States has begun a process for the eventual submission to IAEA inspection of all United States fissile material no longer needed for defence purposes.
 Furthermore, there seems to be broad agreement that plutonium and high enriched uranium from the civilian sector should be stored under conditions of greater transparency, adequate physical security and nuclear safety and with a high degree of assurance against possible diversion for weapons purposes.
 The Agency can assist in building further on existing measures if requested to do so by the relevant States and if adequate resources are made available.
 In compliance with this request I have established a working group within the IAEA secretariat to examine the verification problem and to prepare background papers which may be of use in the negotiations between States.
 Negotiations are well under way at the Conference on Disarmament on a comprehensive test-ban treaty (CTBT).
 Fortunately, each of these cases has turned out to involve only small quantities of nuclear material, and in no instance does this material appear to have come from a nuclear weapons stockpile.
 However, the uncontrolled movement of fissionable material involves both proliferation and radiation risks, and it suggests that control and supervision at some installations authorized to possess and use such material are currently inadequate.
 These problems have been the subject of much discussion between Governments lately, and several measures are being taken.
 A primary condition to prevent trafficking is that institutions handling nuclear material should have adequate systems of accountancy, control and physical protection.
 In these regards, the IAEA can step up advice and technical assistance - if resources are made available.
 Last month the IAEA General Conference invited me to convene a group of experts designated by Member States and competent international organizations to examine the options available for a strengthened Agency role in that area.
 I turn now to the IAEA's work on the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, both nuclear-power generation of electricity and other applications.
 Nuclear power has been stagnating in the Western industrialized countries, partly as a result of a comfortable electricity supply situation in several of these countries and partly as a result of public opposition, especially after the Chernobyl accident.
 East Asia is now a major growth area, where a number of countries are moving ahead with vigorous construction programmes.
 As demand for electricity begins to accelerate worldwide, a continued stagnation of nuclear power could be problematic.
 Ambitious energy saving and the greater use of renewable sources of energy - like solar and wind power and biomass, will not be enough to meet the demand for increased base load electricity which everyone predicts.
 In some places more hydropower may be developed, but the easiest way to meet the increased demand dictated by population increase and economic expansion will generally be through the burning of more fossil fuels, notably coal and gas.
 However, as this is bound to add to the pollution of the world's atmosphere, such a choice would present policy makers with a serious dilemma.
 At a cost, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides may be removed from flue gases; but Governments are committed also to reducing, or at least stabilizing, the level of carbon dioxide emissions in order to try to ward off global warming.
 In this regard, a shift from coal to gas may be welcome, as gas gives rise to less carbon dioxide per energy unit produced.
 However, the current trend is towards a global increase not only in the use of gas but also in the use of all fossil fuels and, consequently, a global increase in carbon dioxide emissions.
 Although nuclear power is essentially emission-free, and although uranium resources and existing industrial capacity would allow a vast expansion of nuclear generating capacity, it is not suggested that nuclear power alone can be the solution to this dilemma.
 It is very difficult, on the other hand, to see that there can be a solution to the dilemma without a substantial nuclear component in the world energy mix.
 "there is a need to continue to seek a way of exploiting the immense energy reserves of nuclear power [in a way] which is publicly acceptable across the whole fuel cycle from procurement and processing through disposal."
 The obstacles to general public acceptance of nuclear power relate to three major issues: the proliferation risk, safety and waste.
 I have already described the proliferation situation, which is moving in a positive direction.
 With accelerated nuclear disarmament and the prospect of non-proliferation approaching universality, one might hope that the peaceful use of nuclear power may at long last be decoupled in people's minds from the anxiety they have felt about the threat of nuclear weapons.
 On safety, Governments are not only focusing on the weaknesses of some reactors of Soviet design, they are also making broad efforts to develop an international safety culture.
 In this regard, a major element was completed this year with the conclusion of the international Convention on Nuclear Safety.
 The Convention has already been signed by 47 States.
 I should mention, lastly, that an International Nuclear Event Scale has been established and adopted by most States using nuclear power to help define the severity of incidents in an easily understandable way.
 Thus, just as safety in the air and safety at sea have long been legitimate international concerns regulated by international instruments, safety in the operation of nuclear power plants the world over is increasingly subject to international rules, guidelines and advice.
 The IAEA is at the centre of the emerging international legal infrastructure surrounding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
 Nevertheless, supervision and enforcement of nuclear safety rules remain the prerogative of national Governments.
 Nevertheless, probably only years of nuclear operations without serious accidents will reduce the concern of a public which is prepared to accept much less risk in the nuclear area than in many others.
 To give only one example, let me mention that a report of the International Labour Organization last April estimating that 3.5 to 5 million persons per year are poisoned by pesticides, of whom 40,000 die, does not appear to have aroused the public.
 The concern is not only about highly radioactive waste resulting from powerplants but even about lower medium-level radioactive waste, sometimes raising problems for further use of modern nuclear techniques in medicine.
 It is probable that these concerns will be allayed only when governments and industry have actually established repositories for wastes of different levels of radioactivity.
 From the scientific and technical standpoint there are no serious obstacles to the building of such repositories and several countries have done so or are preparing to do so.
 However, as the selection of disposal sites often meets opposition, a very open dialogue with the public is needed.
 Experience in several countries shows that this is possible.
 Although the disposal of radioactive waste is clearly a local matter, the extremely long periods during which some wastes remain active creates a common international interest that radioactive waste anywhere on the planet be responsibly handled.
 This is also the reason why there is not only an increasing international exchange of experience in this field, but also a development of internationally agreed legal rules and guidelines.
 We expect that work will soon commence in the IAEA on a binding convention on the safety of radioactive waste management.
 For their electricity generation, they will have to rely on technologically less demanding solutions, mostly involving the burning of fossil fuels, which in turn will make it desirable for technologically advanced nations to make greater use of nuclear power.
 Developing countries members of the IAEA are keenly interested in these questions.
 Meanwhile, the IAEA is intensely and successfully engaged in the transfer of many non-power nuclear techniques to developing countries.
 Emphasis is being placed on techniques which will contribute to sustainable development - food production and preservation, the harnessing of fresh water resources, industrial uses and the promotion of human health.
 Let me give just a few examples of what the Agency is engaged in in these fields.
 In the field of food production, the Agency is promoting the use of the so-called sterile insect technique, which relies on the release of large numbers of radiation-sterilized male insects to mate with fertile females, thereby gradually reducing the population of, for instance, tsetse flies and Mediterranean fruit flies.
 Still in the field of food production, much use is being made of radiation to induce mutants of crops such as rice, grain and bananas and to create strains which may be more resistant to pests or adverse climatic conditions.
 The use of tracer radioisotopes for the mapping of exploitable water resources is another technique promoted by the IAEA technical cooperation programme, especially in arid and semi-arid areas.
 In the field of medicine, the use of radiation is a principal method of combating cancer and the IAEA is much involved, inter alia, in the transfer of such techniques and in assisting recipient States in the field of dosimetry to ensure that the radiation doses delivered are appropriate.
 A very common use of radiation for medical purposes is the sterilization of surgical instruments and skin grafts; here, too, the Agency is providing assistance.
 Let me conclude with some remarks about the prospects for and constraints on the ability of the IAEA to play its full role in meeting the growing demands on the international system.
 As the "Agenda for Peace" and the agenda for development show, there is an obvious link between peace and development.
 Both tasks are likely to increase in importance as nuclear disarmament accelerates and emphasis is placed on sustainable development.
 Despite the constraints of the zero-real-growth budgeting over many years, the IAEA has been able to deliver an expanding programme and to respond promptly to new challenges.
 This is due partly to strong support - including extrabudgetary support - from member States and partly to the enthusiasm, dynamism and versatility of the Agency's staff.
 While we need to attract the best nuclear specialists in the world to remain on top of the problems referred to us, the pay and conditions of service offered by the United Nations Common System have deteriorated.
 As regards financial resources, a decade of severe budgetary constraint, combined with delays in Governments' payments of contributions, is perpetuating the sense of financial crisis.
 As we approach the fiftieth anniversary of the first and, we trust, last use of nuclear weapons in war, and with at last the prospect of major steps towards reducing and perhaps eliminating nuclear arsenals, it is all the more vital that effective verification mechanisms be in place.
 It would be deplorable if short-term concerns over resources reduced the opportunity to secure the major advances in the field of nuclear-arms control which now seem to exist.
 Arms control and disarmament undoubtedly yield a peace dividend in terms of reduced military spending.
 A small part of the peace dividend must be invested in such verification.
 Let me, in closing, record the thanks of the IAEA to the Government of Austria for maintaining its tradition as an excellent host to all the international organizations which are located in Vienna.
 The President: I should like to seek the cooperation of delegations on the matter of punctuality.
 I remind delegations that punctuality is of the utmost importance in ensuring an effective and orderly organization of the Assembly's work and in achieving economies for the United Nations.
 I genuinely hope that all delegations will cooperate.
 Turkey considers the report as a successful attempt to present a well-balanced analysis of the Agency's activities in 1993.
 In the changing international political landscape of our times, the IAEA remains vitally instrumental for the maintenance of international peace and security and continues to promote cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
 During the past year, one of the most remarkable achievements of the Agency was the successful adoption of the Convention on Nuclear Safety.
 We hold the view that this Convention is a significant step in the right direction and hope that it will contribute to maximizing safety at nuclear power plants, of which more than 420 are currently operating world-wide.
 The scope of this Convention should be expanded through additional international instruments to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards system of the Agency.
 The draft resolution before us, in paragraph 9, appeals to all States to become parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety.
 Next year will be a turning-point in the history of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
 We are convinced that the Conference of the parties to the Treaty to be convened in 1995 will contribute to our common goal of achieving universal adherence to the Treaty.
 It is widely recognized that the NPT suffers from several weaknesses, especially in connection with its monitoring and verification regime.
 My delegation hopes that these weaknesses will be effectively addressed during the 1995 Conference.
 This could strengthen and further encourage the IAEA's continuing search for verification methods.
 We are convinced that the IAEA will assume expanded responsibilities after the Conference.
 In the post-cold-war era, illicit trafficking in nuclear material has emerged as a growing threat to international peace and security.
 This is a grave concern for all of us.
 We have to develop a common plan of action to combat this phenomenon.
 In this context, we must address not only the symptoms but also the root causes.
 The paragraphs on Iraq have been updated to reflect the progress that has been made.
 The paragraph on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has been elaborated to include reference to the bilateral talks.
 It is a balanced text which seeks to be responsive to the needs and interests of all IAEA members.
 The draft resolution has gained broad support.
 India has been a member of the Agency since its inception in 1957.
 We have consistently attached the highest importance to the objectives of the IAEA, and we are active participants in its many activities.
 In conformity with this spirit, India lays emphasis on the Agency's role in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
 We note with satisfaction that in September the General Conference adopted resolutions on strengthening the Agency's technical cooperation activities.
 It also adopted resolutions supporting the Agency's role in the use of isotope hydrology for water-resource management and in plans for producing potable water economically.
 For instance, the availability of radioisotopes is influenced by the shortage of high-flux research reactors as sources of radioisotope production.
 One of the crucial areas for the Agency is to help member countries, particularly those which require technical assistance and expertise, in their plans to develop nuclear power.
 It can also enhance its activities in other, non-power applications in the fields of agriculture, medicine and industry.
 We hope that more projects of real and demonstrable benefit to the people will be developed and that such model projects will give an impetus to the growth of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
 India, on its part, will be ready to intensify its interaction with the Agency in these areas and to share its know-how, either bilaterally or through the Agency technical cooperation programmes.
 In September Vienna also witnessed the signing of the International Convention on Nuclear Safety.
 India was among the first few to sign this Convention.
 The Agency has done commendable work in helping the process of negotiation and conclusion of the safety Convention.
 We look forward to the exchange of ideas, suggestions and expertise under the peer-group review mechanism envisaged under the Convention.
 Another important area of the Agency relates to the application of safeguards.
 We note with interest that the Agency has embarked upon a major exercise on the strengthening of the safeguards system.
 We attach importance to this exercise, aimed at making the safeguards system more efficient and cost-effective.
 In this context, one of the recurring themes over the year in the Board meetings of the Agency has been the implementation of the safeguards agreement between the Agency and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
 This is a complex and substantive issue, in which there have been many developments, both technical and political.
 Our point of view has been consistent.
 We believe that the best way in which this difficult issue can be resolved is through patient discussions among all the concerned parties.
 We have supported a policy of cooperation and dialogue rather than confrontation and deadlines, and in this spirit have welcomed the discussions between the United States of America and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
 We have similar reservations on the ninth preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution being considered under this item.
 One of the new resolutions at the General Conference related to illicit trafficking in nuclear material, an issue which has attracted worldwide attention.
 The threat emanating from such illegal trafficking is particularly grave when linked to clandestine nuclear programmes.
 We have always unequivocally supported all efforts at non-proliferation which are universal and non-discriminatory.
 Similarly, we support measures which are truly universal in the disarmament field: the chemical weapons Convention, the proposed comprehensive test-ban treaty, and a treaty on the cut-off of the production of fissile material for weapons.
 What we cannot subscribe to is a treaty that divides the world into nuclear haves and have-nots, with an inherently inequitable set of responsibilities and obligations for the two.
 In our view, the only logical and viable approach to the proliferation problem is to work for the goal of complete nuclear disarmament.
 Before I conclude, I would once again reiterate our full support for and cooperation with the Agency in the execution of its many responsibilities.
 In the context of these changes and challenges, the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency has assumed a higher profile than at any other time in its history.
 Strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime remains a top priority for both the Agency and its member States.
 The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains the cornerstone of international efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
 It is our firm belief and hope that the 1995 Conference will extend the NPT indefinitely and unconditionally.
 With its extensive experience in safeguards verification activities, the Agency is well placed to play a leading role in both developing and implementing the verification regime for such agreements.
 The Government of Ukraine has agreed to place its nuclear material under IAEA safeguards and has indicated its intention to accede to the NPT.
 There are signs that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea will be reassuming its obligations under the NPT.
 We urge the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to allow the IAEA to have access to all safeguard-relevant information and locations.
 We welcome the steps being taken by the Agency to strengthen the safeguard system, which, together with the NPT, constitutes the principal international assurance of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
 We endorse in particular the request to the IAEA Director to continue with the assessment, development and testing of measures for achieving a strengthened and more cost-effective safeguards system and to present proposals to that end to the IAEA Board of Governors in March 1995.
 Nuclear safety remains a key area of the IAEA's work.
 Poland was among the countries that signed that Convention during the thirty-eighth General Conference of the IAEA, on the day it was opened for signature.
 Poland believes that it will, among other things, help ensure the safety of the first-generation reactors which present a significant threat to both my country and the whole of Europe.
 The dimension of this problem deserves serious consideration and the taking of all necessary measures by the international community.
 The IAEA Report for 1993 makes clear the extent of the Agency's activities in the field of technical assistance and cooperation.
 Poland, while not at present developing a nuclear-power option on its territory, does benefit from the Agency's technical assistance in the field of application of advanced nuclear methods and technologies, particularly in plant breeding, soil science and animal production.
 In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Poland's support for the Agency's goals and objectives.
 Our support finds its reflection in our co-sponsorship of the draft resolution on the report of the IAEA.
 In the reporting period we have witnessed significant and promising developments in various parts of the world which were aimed at strengthening the non-proliferation regime.
 Argentina and Brazil, for instance, have agreed to be transparent and verifiable with regard to each other and to the IAEA.
 Cuba has announced its intention to adhere to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, thus raising the hope that the whole of Latin America may soon become a nuclear-weapon-free continent.
 In Africa we can also see good progress - due, in part, to the valuable assistance of the IAEA - towards the elaboration of an agreement that will turn that continent into another nuclear-weapon-free zone.
 The Agency's skilful work in verifying the peaceful nature of nuclear activities through its safeguards system has played an outstanding role for the community of nations by providing assurances in the field of nuclear non-proliferation.
 We appreciate the impartial and consistent work of the IAEA secretariat, which is aimed at maintaining the continuity of safeguards and monitoring some of the activities of the five-megawatt plant, as requested by the Security Council in late May.
 We share the public's increasing concern about recent cases of illegal transfer and smuggling of nuclear materials.
 That is a serious challenge to the international non-proliferation regime, causing additional health hazards as well as safety and environmental concerns.
 We are of the view that in this context the International Atomic Energy Agency has an important role to play by facilitating international cooperation, including technical assistance to the countries concerned in the non-law-enforcement-related fields.
 The Hungarian Government wishes to see joint efforts by Member States, the IAEA and other relevant international organizations coordinated to curb and stem this problem.
 Further steps must also be taken to eliminate the threat of nuclear proliferation.
 Real and speedy progress is needed in negotiations on a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty and in efforts leading to the elaboration of a multilateral internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other explosive devices.
 These tasks, like the ongoing process of the dismantling of nuclear weapons or the safe storage of the already substantial quantities of plutonium and highly enriched uranium, require additional efforts from the International Atomic Energy Agency to elaborate and eventually to operate an effective international verification mechanism.
 The peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, in particular nuclear-power generation, is of strategic importance for our national economy.
 The Hungarian authorities therefore have high esteem for the nuclear-safety-related activities of the Agency.
 We commend the valuable work performed by the IAEA in the course of the elaboration, adoption and opening for signature of the Convention on Nuclear Safety.
 Related national measures and international cooperation could contribute greatly to achieving and maintaining high-level nuclear safety and to utilizing nuclear energy without any significant risk.
 Guided by that desire, the Hungarian Government has signed the Convention and intends to comply fully with its provisions.
 Let us express the hope that the largest possible number of States will soon sign and ratify the Convention.
 The accumulated knowledge and experience of the International Atomic Energy Agency have always been of fundamental importance to Hungary's nuclear industry and scientific community.
 We intend, therefore, to continue to make the best use of those assets and to cooperate closely with the Agency.
 Mr. Shoukry (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset to extend a welcome to Dr. Hans Blix, Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and to congratulate him on his valuable statement wherein he reported on the Agency's achievements over the past year.
 The IAEA has an important role to play and an increasingly significant duty to take advantage of these developments in promoting efforts aimed at nuclear disarmament and in maintaining international peace and security.
 These two requirements are the only guarantee of the credibility of any non-proliferation regime.
 Egypt reaffirms the importance of the accession by all the States of the Middle East to the NPT and of their placing all nuclear installations anywhere in the region, without exception, under the Agency's safeguards regime.
 This would constitute an important element in support of the peace process in the Middle East in view of its positive effects it would have on confidence-building and in dispelling the sense of danger that continues to cast its shadow over the region.
 I should like also to express Egypt's appreciation for the advice and assistance provided by the Agency, which has contributed positively to the work of the African Group of Experts on the drafting of the treaty on the denuclearization of Africa which, we hope, will be completed soon.
 I should like to conclude by expressing the hope that the Agency will continue its successful work and that it will receive the necessary support through the cooperation of the Member States and receive the resources necessary for it to discharge its important responsibilities.
 The IAEA plays a very important role in verifying that nuclear energy is not diverted from peaceful uses to military purposes; in assisting Member States to improve the safety of nuclear activities undertaken in their territories; and in disseminating nuclear technologies for a variety of applications.
 With the rapid growth of the world's population and the continuous expansion of the global economy, the demand for energy is increasing throughout the world.
 The fact that the greater use of nuclear energy will help to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide emitted into the environment continues to gain relevance.
 Although it is up to each individual country to decide which energy sources to use, the IAEA has valuable expertise in this area and should be ready to offer advice and assistance to Member States upon request.
 Let me now comment on a number of specific issues.
 I turn first to the question of safeguards.
 The implementation of the Safeguards Agreement between the IAEA and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea remains the most acute problem facing the Agency.
 It is my Government's position that this Agreement is still in force and should be implemented fully; we continue to support the Director General's strenuous and patient efforts in this regard.
 Once again, we urge the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to respond immediately to the concerns of the international community as articulated in resolution GC(XXXVIII)/RES/16 of the General Conference of the IAEA, which was adopted by an overwhelming majority on 23 September 1994.
 My delegation is pleased that the Convention on Nuclear Safety has been adopted and is open for signing.
 I hope that as many countries as possible will accede to the Convention and that it will enter into force before long.
 My delegation believes that our next task should be the preparation of a convention on the safety of radioactive waste management, and urges that work be started without delay on the basis of the General Conference resolution to which I referred earlier.
 Next, I should like to touch upon the recent increase in incidents of illicit trafficking in nuclear material, a problem that has very serious implications for both nuclear non-proliferation and safety.
 Lastly, on technical cooperation with developing countries, my delegation appreciates and supports the IAEA's recent efforts to explore projects which address the development needs of a country and which may be expected to directly affect the lives of its people.
 This new trend requires the IAEA to become more closely involved with development-related ministries and agencies as well as with other international organizations.
 In this connection, my delegation would like to point out that, under the present and the foreseeable circumstances, it is especially important that the relevant organizations of the United Nations system cooperate closely in meeting the changing requirements of Member States.
 Mr. Sievering (United States of America): On behalf of my Government, I congratulate the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on his report, and in particular commend him and all his staff for the many achievements that are reflected in the report.
 It is clear from reviewing the IAEA's annual report for 1993 and listening to the informative remarks of the Director General that a major hallmark characterizing IAEA's activities is diversity.
 As an international organization, the IAEA is, by its very nature, staffed by individuals drawn from different and diverse backgrounds and cultures.
 These individuals bring to their respective positions an impressive range of skills.
 And in response to its statutory mandate and the needs of its members, the IAEA implements a diverse set of programmes which touch many different lives in many different ways around the world.
 Nowhere is the diversity of IAEA programmes more apparent than in its multifaceted programme of technical cooperation.
 This programme spans all continents and deals with multiple human needs, through efforts, for example, to increase food production, improve medical care, control the spread of disease among people and livestock, ensure safe and reliable water supplies, and protect the environment.
 In a steadily shrinking world, in which all countries are increasingly facing common problems which transcend national boundaries, IAEA programmes are part of timely and effective responses.
 During the past 25 years, the IAEA has awarded approximately 9,300 fellowships and conducted over 500 training courses for its members.
 For many years the IAEA has addressed a diverse array of safety issues, ranging from nuclear-power-reactor safety to the safe handling of medical isotopes.
 The United States strongly supports the IAEA's continuing work in nuclear safety, and is pleased to have been one of the first signatories of the International Convention on Nuclear Safety last month in Vienna.
 My Government urges all countries to participate in this important step forward in enhancing nuclear safety world wide.
 In his statement the Director General highlighted a diverse set of safeguards activities being pursued by the IAEA.
 The United States is fully engaged with the IAEA and other IAEA members in efforts to strengthen the safeguards system further.
 It provides not only the essential confidence that nuclear material is being used exclusively for peaceful purposes, but also the fundamental basis for continued international nuclear cooperation and commerce.
 For these reasons, the United States will continue to advocate universal acceptance of IAEA safeguards.
 In his message to the participants at the thirty-eighth regular session of the IAEA General Conference last month, President Clinton welcomed "the Agency's efforts in its diverse technical programmes".
 The breadth and complexity of these programmes is remarkable.
 Yet, for all their diversity, the underlying purpose of these programmes, when taken as a whole, is simple and singular.
 In every facet of its activities, the IAEA is dedicated to the basic goal of promoting a more peaceful and prosperous world for its members, and for the international community as a whole.
 Like those before it, this report, which is particularly valuable and instructive, is evidence of the Agency's vitality; during its consideration by the General Assembly a tribute must of course be paid to all the Agency's organs for the activities they carry out.
 In considering of the annual report, we can immediately note with satisfaction the commendable efforts made by the Agency's various sectors of activity during the period under consideration - and with financial resources frozen, practically speaking, at the level of almost a decade ago.
 To this end, the Agency must be guaranteed sufficient means to carry out its task of promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy by strengthening its technical-assistance activities designed, in particular, to improve developing countries' scientific and technological capacities in this area.
 Through its promotional activities in the areas of agriculture, food, health, industry, the environment and earth sciences, the Agency accumulates and disseminates a broad range of experience while helping to promote the development, acquisition and transfer of nuclear technology in optimal conditions of security and safety.
 Algeria for some time now has had an excellent relationship with the IAEA and has benefited from some modest but precious assistance in terms of expertise and financial resources.
 This technical cooperation, which has developed over the years, has helped to strengthen those relations, which have culminated in Algeria's decision voluntarily to submit to the IAEA safeguards system its two research and radioisotope-producing reactors.
 In this context, I am glad to note that thanks to the Agency's technical assistance Algeria has in recent years developed activities designed to expand the application of nuclear technology to the fields of health, agriculture, monitoring of foodstuffs, industrial gammagraphy, environmental protection and the management of radioactive waste.
 Given this remarkable progress, my Government intends to make additional investments in this field and to share its achievements and expertise with our fraternal African countries through the framework of South-South cooperation, to which my country is deeply committed.
 Algeria welcomes the successful conclusion of the arduous negotiations leading to the adoption of this important international legal instrument and is glad to be one of its first signatories.
 The conclusion of the Convention on Nuclear Safety should serve to stimulate the normative work of the Agency, and other such regimes could be envisaged as needed in order to meet various existing concerns and thus minimize the risk of accidents as a result of improper use of equipment.
 Here it should be noted in principle that the IAEA's safeguards system, which is still one of the key tools in preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, should not serve indiscriminately to justify unjustifiable and inappropriate impediments on the transfer of nuclear technology to the benefit of developing countries.
 With the expected progress in the process of nuclear disarmament, the Agency's proven expertise will of course be called upon in providing a credible verification system to ensure respect for agreements on a total ban on nuclear testing and on prohibiting the production of fissile materials for military use.
 Along those same lines, I should like to express Algeria's gratitude for the Agency's positive role and the valuable assistance that it has provided to African experts in preparing the treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa.
 We must hope that in the near future the Agency will be in a position to participate in establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, and it is on this expression of hope that I conclude my statement.
 It is our opinion that the report reflects the multiplicity of useful activities which the IAEA undertook during that period.
 The election of a representative of Ukraine as Vice-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the IAEA is viewed in our country as acknowledgment of the role and the virtues of Ukraine in this area, and also of its commitment to the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
 On 28 September of this year, Ukraine signed an agreement with the IAEA on the application of safeguards to all nuclear material in all types of peaceful activity.
 We feel that that event is a solid contribution by our country to the strengthening of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime.
 It is the first time that such an agreement has been concluded by the IAEA with a State that has nuclear weapons on its territory but has decided to become a non-nuclear State.
 We feel that the signature of that agreement will eliminate all other barriers to establishing an expanding cooperation by Ukraine with other States, including members of the Nuclear Suppliers' Group, in the area of research, production and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
 Of particular importance for Ukraine and the entire world community today are the problems of nuclear and radiation safety.
 We note with great satisfaction that the activities of the Agency are paying increasing attention to these problems.
 We find evidence of the significant progress achieved in international cooperation in the area of nuclear and radiation safety in the preparation for the implementation of the Convention on Nuclear Safety.
 Ukraine was one of the first to sign that document, thereby taking upon itself obligations to undertake measures to support and enhance the safety of nuclear installations.
 The Agency's secretariat has played an important role in this connection.
 There is a gradually emerging international consensus with regard to the safety of Soviet-designed nuclear-power plants, and it is important that that consensus be linked to a realistic assessment of the virtues and inadequacies of such equipment.
 We must now move towards closer cooperation between East and West in the area of nuclear safety and promote the establishment of infrastructures that can develop and implement programmes to enhance the safety of nuclear-power plants.
 Such problems demand long and painstaking efforts, devoted not so much to solving technical problems as to bringing about radical changes in the economics, management and development of a nuclear regulatory regime.
 In this context I should like to speak about the problems related to the Chernobyl nuclear-power plant.
 We feel that all questions related to nuclear-power units of the Chernobyl type and their shut-down must be viewed, not as local questions, but as questions that should be part of a comprehensive, international programme.
 It should be pointed out that within the framework of cooperation between Ukraine and the Group of 7 most-developed countries an intensive search is being carried out to find acceptable financial and technical solutions to the problem of the Chernobyl nuclear-power plant.
 In designing nuclear-power plants in Ukraine, no one considered the technology of using or disposing of spent radioactive materials.
 All such operations were carried out on the territory of a neighbouring country.
 Today, Ukraine is confronted with the serious problem of establishing permanent, long-term depots for such material on its own territory.
 However, in siting such installations on the European continent, and with an awareness of the danger inherent in the disposal of radioactive waste by European States, it has been concluded that joint efforts are required to solve this complicated problem.
 We support the Agency's activities aimed at establishing a comprehensive civil liability nuclear damage regime, and we would express our commitment to the fundamental principles of that regime, aware as we are that it must be applicable to nuclear installations in Ukraine.
 Our country's Parliament is examining a law on the use of nuclear energy and protection from radioactivity that will contain provisions for the exceptional and absolute responsibility of the operator in nuclear-damage compensation.
 The law will also contain standards for regulating the conditions and statute of limitations for such compensation.
 With regard to accession to that Convention, one must bear in mind, first, the economic and financial situation of my country, as well as the fact that we possess neither an insurance or compensation structure nor any relevant legislative regulations.
 First, this year marks the end of the first 25 years of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and, secondly, it is the year in which the Convention on Nuclear Safety was concluded and opened to signature.
 It is in this context that we highly praise the role of the IAEA and its safeguards system in the verification mechanism of the non-proliferation Treaty.
 We regard that problem as one of key importance and assure the IAEA of our readiness to support all its efforts fully to implement the safeguards agreement with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
 The IAEA will in future have to cope with even more demanding tasks in this field in connection with the continued process of nuclear disarmament, for that process will remain a permanent reality.
 Fissile material will increasingly be diverted from the military sphere to civilian use and thus be brought under the IAEA safeguards system.
 We note with satisfaction the attention paid to the "93 plus 2 Programme", the framework of which includes many recommendations submitted jointly by the delegations of Austria and the former Czechoslovakia at the thirty-sixth General Conference of the IAEA in 1992.
 It gives me great honour and pleasure to inform the Assembly that, on 20 September, just as the Convention on Nuclear Safety was opened for signature in Vienna, the Czech Republic signed it.
 We regard this step as our contribution to efforts to increase the safety of nuclear installations all over the world through national measures and international cooperation.
 In doing so, we also wish to express our readiness to have the international community objectively evaluate the safety level of our own nuclear installations.
 We attach paramount importance to this question, inasmuch as the Czech Republic has been operating in a densely populated region of Central Europe its Dukovany nuclear-power plant, with an output of 1,760 MW, and is building a 2,000 MW nuclear-power plant at Temelin.
 This plant will go down in history as the first nuclear-power plant combining to a great extent Russian and American nuclear technologies.
 On this occasion, let me recall the attention and efforts with which the IAEA has been assisting countries of Central and Eastern Europe that are operating nuclear reactors of Soviet provenance to upgrade their technical and safety standards.
 Mr. Biegman (Netherlands), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 Providing technical assistance and cooperation is indeed another important role the Agency plays.
 For a number of countries, particularly developing ones, material and scientific assistance in the peaceful use of nuclear energy, especially in the use of ionizing radiation, contributes to their technical and economic progress.
 The Czech Republic cannot as yet contribute more towards the fund of technical assistance and cooperation, but we intend to re-evaluate our contribution as soon as our economic situation permits.
 Let me conclude by thanking the staff of the IAEA secretariat, headed by Director General Hans Blix, as well as the Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and members of its Board of Governors, the staff of the advisory committees, the working groups and all those who have participated in the IAEA's work.
 The Czech delegation greatly appreciates their devoted work and I assure them of my Government's readiness to continue working with the IAEA in all fields of its activities.
 Under the Director General's leadership, the Agency has successfully met once again the challenges of the past year.
 Austria commends the IAEA for its activities in the field of safety of nuclear installations and radiation protection.
 We have been following with great interest the Agency's efforts related to the operational safety of nuclear-power plants.
 We also support technical assistance to the newly independent States.
 Austria recently signed the Convention on Nuclear Safety, completed under the aegis of the Agency, and we are hoping for progress towards a future convention on the safety of radioactive waste management.
 We are interested in the development and testing of alternative safeguards measures, such as environmental monitoring and the expanded involvement of national systems of nuclear accounting and control in verification.
 A major challenge for the Agency resulted from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's failure to respond to obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its safeguards agreements and to the relevant resolutions of the Board of Governors and the United Nations Security Council.
 Decisive action by the Agency, carried out in close cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission, also yielded noticeable success in the dismantling of Iraq's clandestine nuclear-weapons programme.
 We recognize the centrality of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) to all efforts to stem the spread of nuclear weapons and we will support the indefinite and unconditional extension of the NPT at the review and extension Conference next year.
 In this respect, we welcome the recent agreement between Ukraine and the IAEA for the application of safeguards to all nuclear materials in all peaceful nuclear activities.
 We look forward to the accession of Ukraine to the NPT as a nuclear-weapon State.
 There is an important link between international endeavours to prevent nuclear proliferation and nuclear disarmament, as called for under Article VI of the NPT.
 In order further to facilitate the process of nuclear disarmament, which has gained momentum in recent years, we therefore call for the early start of negotiations on a "cut-off" convention to ban the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.
 We are gratified by the continued moratoriums on nuclear testing declared by the United States of America, the United Kingdom, France and Russia, and we appeal to all States to make every effort to intensify the negotiations and to ensure the earliest possible completion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
 We appreciate the IAEA'S contributions to the ongoing negotiations in Geneva and we foresee an important role for the Agency in the verification of a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
 The success of a future comprehensive test-ban treaty will largely depend on the quality of the work of the organization entrusted with its verification.
 Close cooperation with and proximity to the IAEA and its facilities will undoubtedly facilitate this work significantly.
 The Austrian Government has therefore offered to accommodate the future comprehensive test-ban treaty organization in Vienna.
 The promotion of nuclear non-proliferation and of nuclear safety world-wide, the prime responsibility of the IAEA, is paramount to global security.
 As the host country for the IAEA, we commend the Agency on its efforts and on another year of successful implementation of its mandate.
 Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
 The European Union thanks the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for his concise, comprehensive and informative report.
 It clearly demonstrates that the Agency can once again look back to a year of successful work in promoting world-wide cooperation for the peaceful and safe use of nuclear energy.
 The European Union feels a particularly strong responsibility for promoting nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear safety world-wide.
 Strengthening the international non-proliferation regime is among the chief priorities of the European Union's common foreign and security policy, developed under the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty.
 The Union therefore strongly supports the strengthening of the Agency's safeguards system.
 With regard to the application of Agency safeguards in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, we are greatly concerned about the continuing and even increasing non-compliance by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with its obligations both under the non-proliferation Treaty and under its non-proliferation Treaty safeguards agreement.
 The European Union, at its Corfu summit meeting in June, noted with deep concern that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea had not permitted the Agency to complete essential inspection activities, thus making it impossible to ascertain whether plutonium had been diverted for non-peaceful purposes.
 This persistent non-compliance with international obligations constitutes a serious challenge to the international non-proliferation regime and to the safeguards system as a whole.
 However, we wish to emphasize that our objective remains to secure full compliance by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with its legal obligations.
 As regards the Agency's activities related to the dismantling of the clandestine nuclear weapons programme of Iraq, we note positive developments.
 The IAEA and its action team have succeeded - in cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and with close support from the European Union - in further neutralizing and eliminating Iraq's nuclear-weapons potential.
 After Iraq's formal acceptance of Security Council resolution 715 (1991) in November last year, and given the progress reported by UNSCOM since then, we may now see the introduction of a long-term verification system.
 In this context, we welcome Argentina's decision to accede to the non-proliferation Treaty before the end of this year.
 The European Union notes with concern that a major newly independent State, Ukraine, has not yet acceded to the non-proliferation Treaty.
 We welcomed the agreement between Ukraine and the IAEA for the application of safeguards to all nuclear material in all peaceful nuclear activities in Ukraine.
 We wish to point out, however, that this safeguards agreement is no substitute for Ukraine's rapid accession to the non-proliferation Treaty.
 We furthermore underline the importance of universal adherence to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and therefore call upon all States that are not yet parties to the non-proliferation Treaty to accede as soon as possible, preferably before the extension conference.
 In this connection we welcome the progress being made in other important fields of arms control and non-proliferation, such as a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
 Furthermore, we hope that in the near future negotiations on a convention on a ban on the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices - known as the "cut-off" - will be initiated.
 In both areas we appreciate the IAEA's readiness to contribute to the ongoing negotiation processes.
 We hope that full agreement on all the provisions of the draft treaty will soon be reached among all the States concerned.
 In the Middle East peace process we have witnessed remarkable progress.
 We welcome this development and strongly encourage all States in the region to join the non-proliferation Treaty and establish a multilateral and comprehensive safeguards system as a step towards enhancing peace and security in the context of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone.
 There is serious concern in States members of the Union about recent cases of illegal transfers and smuggling of plutonium and uranium, sometimes of weapons-grade quality.
 We urge Member States to apply the relevant legal instruments and the IAEA's standards for physical protection, and to seek assistance in cases where the existing systems of accounting and control of materials and of physical protection or export controls are inadequate.
 The Convention can be expected to help harmonize safety requirements, in particular through the implementation of the peer review process, and thus to enhance nuclear safety worldwide.
 We hope that the greatest possible number of States, in particular those using nuclear energy, will soon sign and implement the Convention.
 Since the Group of Seven summit in Munich two years ago, bilateral and international assistance programmes have shown important improvements.
 The Union, at its Corfu summit in June this year, recommended to Ukraine a series of measures in the field of nuclear safety and pledged substantial financial and other assistance to encourage and support these measures.
 Early closure of reactor units 1 and 3 of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant and confirmation that reactor 2 will not reopen remain high priorities, subject to the introduction of acceptable alternative energy resources, possibly including new reactors with adequate safety standards.
 Reform of the energy sector, review of nuclear safety regulations and Ukrainian ratification of the Vienna Convention and Joint Protocol on nuclear third party liability are also seen as vital ingredients of this programme.
 The Union will make available 100 million European Currency Units (ECU) as grants and 400 million ECU as loans to support this package of measures, which was formally adopted as an action plan at the Naples summit of the Group of Seven in July.
 At Naples, the Group of Seven pledged an additional $200 million, and there are pledges for more funds from other States members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
 The safety situation at Chernobyl gives rise to serious concern, and we therefore expect that the action plan will provide a sound basis for prompt and appropriate decisions leading to the closure of the plant.
 Turning now to the Agency's activities in the field of technical cooperation, the Union commends the Director General and the secretariat on the implementation of the 1993 programme.
 Increased income for the technical assistance fund and other funding instruments, higher implementation rates, increased delivery figures and the start-up of the new concept of model projects indicate that the Agency's programme in technical cooperation is on the right track.
 The Union considers technical cooperation a very high political priority.
 Its member States are contributing sizeable extrabudgetary funds to the Agency's technical cooperation activities.
 We would like to encourage all measures, already initiated or planned, to improve programme delivery further and to make the Agency's assistance more directly relevant to the stated needs and development priorities of the countries concerned.
 Mr. Breitenstein (Finland): Let me begin by stating that Finland associates itself with the statement of the European Union just delivered by the representative the presidency of the Union.
 In this statement I shall therefore touch only on some aspects of the Agency's work which are of particular relevance to Finland's relations with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
 My Government remains strongly committed to international cooperation in the peaceful and safe use of nuclear energy.
 In per capita terms, Finland is one of the most important producers of nuclear energy.
 In building that capacity, we have benefited from international cooperation and assistance.
 In turn, we have been able to play our part in advising and assisting others, notably in our neighbouring areas and within the framework of the IAEA.
 The Finnish Government strongly supports the indefinite and unconditional extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
 We are particularly active in the preparations for the 1995 review conference, and we are pleased to note that the Agency is making a valuable contribution to the preparatory process.
 Indeed, the Agency's safeguards are essential to the implementation of the Treaty.
 Finland welcomes these steps and regards the further strengthening of the safeguards system, also in this respect, essential to its effectiveness and credibility.
 I am therefore happy to state that Finland is and will remain a contributor to the Agency's safeguards support programme.
 The IAEA has moved forward in streamlining its safeguards operations.
 In this connection, we welcome the partnership agreement concluded between the IAEA and the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM).
 During the 38th General Conference of the IAEA, a major step forward was taken in the field of nuclear safety.
 Finland was among the first to sign the Nuclear Safety Convention.
 We believe that highest standards in nuclear safety, radiation protection, and waste management in all areas of nuclear applications are essential for the continued development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
 Finland, together with several other States, supported a broader scope for the Convention.
 We welcome, therefore, the commitment of the contracting parties to apply corresponding principles in all uses of nuclear energy and to develop an international convention on the safety of radioactive waste management.
 The IAEA has a recognized role in the formulation of internationally applicable norms and standards, notably in the field of nuclear safety.
 The IAEA continues to face many challenges.
 We commend Director General Hans Blix and his secretariat for their good work done under difficult circumstances.
 My Government will continue to participate actively and constructively in this important work.
 Mr. Svanko (Belarus) (interpretation from Russian): We listened with great interest to the very comprehensive report given by the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Blix, and we have analysed the annual report on the activities of the Agency for 1993.
 We note with satisfaction that special attention was given by the organs of the Agency to the development of a more effective safeguards regime and to its extension to the greatest possible number of countries.
 Attention was also given to dealing with radioactive waste, radiation safety and the safety of nuclear installations.
 A regional project of technical cooperation was also established to promote clean-up activities in those countries of areas that were contaminated as a result of nuclear-fuel-cycle activities, defence activities, and industrial and research work.
 Allow me, in reference to these special events, to offer you a few thoughts on the item we are considering.
 When the Republic of Belarus became an independent State, it indicated its desire to achieve non-nuclear status and laid down that desire in our new Constitution, which was adopted by the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Belarus on 15 March 1994.
 "The Republic of Belarus has the goal of making its territory a non-nuclear zone and its State a neutral State."
 Belarus has firmly and consistently carried out measures to achieve that goal.
 As we have already pointed out, in 1992 we completed, ahead of time the withdrawal of all tactical nuclear weapons from the territory of our Republic, and we are working now on ridding our territory of strategic nuclear warheads, in accordance with existing bilateral agreements with Russia.
 The next concrete step we took to strengthen the international non-proliferation regime was to state that our Republic was ready to sign an IAEA safeguards agreement.
 At the same time, in order to implement the provisions of the agreement effectively, it is necessary to carry out a great deal of preparatory work, primarily to establish a State system of accounting for and monitoring nuclear materials.
 In this connection we note with gratitude the participation of Japan and Sweden in solving these questions.
 Belarus therefore signed an agreement within the framework of the Commonwealth of Independent States on cooperation in the area of the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and we have prepared an agreement with Poland on an early-warning system on nuclear disasters and cooperation in the area of nuclear safety.
 We are preparing similar agreements with Lithuania and also agreements with the United States on cooperation in the use of atomic energy.
 We are prepared to consider proposals on concluding other such agreements, mainly with our neighbouring countries.
 Belarus is very much interested in pursuing initiatives and measures that are being carried out by the Agency itself to enhance nuclear safety, because there are nuclear power plants near our borders.
 We emphasize this because we can see from the report of the IAEA that incidents at nuclear power plants are continuing.
 We welcome the efforts of the IAEA, together with UNDP, the Commission of the European Union and the World Association of Nuclear Operators, to enhance the safety of nuclear installations.
 We note with satisfaction the completion of the drafting and the opening for signature of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which is to introduce high safety standards for nuclear installations into worldwide practice.
 We are also interested in a rapid conclusion of the preparations for international safety standards for protection against radiation, since this has a direct bearing on the conditions under which populations live on territories contaminated by radionuclides.
 We share the international community's concern about illicit trafficking in nuclear materials, and we welcome the efforts to overcome that problem.
 Belarus supports the Agency's moves to establish a comprehensive regime of civilian liability for nuclear damage.
 It caused unprecedented radioactive contamination of the environment in many countries, and it resulted in deaths and sickness in the most severely affected territories, of which Belarus, like Ukraine and Russia, is one.
 The cost of undoing the damage, together with direct and indirect expenditures between 1986 and 2015, is assessed at $45 billion, which is approximately 30 times our State's budget for this year.
 But most horrible of all are the accident's effects on people's health.
 Among the children living in the most contaminated areas the number of cases of anaemia, thyroid cancer and respiratory disorders is more than 100 times what it was in the past.
 In the next 50 years, according to the calculations of Belarusian and foreign scientists, there may be up to 150 cases of child leukaemia annually.
 Following the Chernobyl disaster the frequency of birth defects in the non-contaminated areas increased by a factor of 1.2, compared to a factor of 1.8 in the contaminated areas.
 This, together with other detrimental consequences, has resulted in negative population growth in several regions of Belarus.
 Unfortunately our country cannot, by itself, deal with the disaster that has befallen it.
 We are grateful to all countries and all international organizations that have helped us to overcome its consequences.
 We hope that the assistance we receive will not lessen.
 We call for continuing non-governmental humanitarian initiatives and for steady intergovernmental cooperation to resolve the long-term medical, environmental, humanitarian and scientific problems arising from the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster.
 With regard to the International Atomic Energy Agency's programme of technical assistance and cooperation for 1995-1996, Belarus has put forward projects primarily related to problems connected with Chernobyl.
 We hope that these projects will be included in the Agency's programme, especially since, throughout the Agency's existence, Belarus did not, until recently, receive any money from the fund for technical assistance and cooperation.
 This experience was our sad fate, but what happened to us is, we think, of great interest to the entire world.
 In 1990, under the auspices of the IAEA, an international project on Chernobyl was undertaken to assess the radiation situation and the health of people in the affected regions.
 In addition, a study was carried out to assess what measures should be taken to protect the population.
 More than three years have elapsed since then, and in 1996 we shall mark the tenth anniversary of the disaster.
 Its task would be to study and analyse the material that has been accumulated.
 In our opinion, one product of such work might be the publication of a special summary report, which would become the property of the entire world community.
 There are currently about 6,000 reactors of different types in operation in the world.
 Therefore, our country appeals to all interested States and international organizations - especially the IAEA, the WHO and the Commission of the European Communities - not to slacken their efforts to have every last effect of that disaster eradicated.
 Mr. F. A. Khan (Pakistan): At the outset I should like to express the Pakistan delegation's sincere appreciation to Mr. Hans Blix, the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for his detailed statement on the Agency's activities for 1993.
 The widening scope of the programmes and activities of the IAEA bear testimony to the energy and dedication of Mr. Blix and his colleagues in the Agency. .............................................................................
 Pakistan's decision to seek the presidency of the General Conference this year was a manifestation of our commitment to the important tasks of the Agency.
 This well presented document outlines a number of complex and technical issues in a way that will facilitate meaningful discussion here.
 Despite the negative public perceptions created in some countries and the fears aroused about the danger of nuclear proliferation, nuclear energy remains a viable and attractive energy option for many countries.
 Pakistan's current and projected need for power generation is considerable.
 The attractive framework of our energy policy has generated considerable interest.
 A large number of projects for thermal, oil, gas and coal-fired plants, involving investments of over $11 billion, have recently been concluded with United States and other companies.
 However, in the words of the United States Energy Secretary on the conclusion of her recent visit to Pakistan,
 "We have no intention of walking away from a power source like nuclear energy.
 In this regard, the assistance that the Agency has rendered to several countries in providing advanced technologies such as MAED, WASP and ENPEP for an integrated approach to energy and nuclear power planning is praiseworthy.
 Pakistan is an active participant in this project, which we hope will lead to a better-informed assessment of the role of nuclear power.
 I must, however, express our concern at the relative decline in the Agency's promotional activities.
 The 1993 annual report commences with a review of IAEA safeguards and controls, then considers nuclear safety and only later takes up the area that is of vital concern to the majority of the Agency's membership: technical cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
 It is our fervent hope that this sequence in the report does not reflect the priority the Agency attaches to its areas of responsibility.
 Adequate resources are required to finance those programmes.
 We are disappointed that the pledges for technical cooperation programmes for 1994 have so far reached only 66 per cent of the target of $59.4 million.
 Moreover, the shortfall in overall contributions has made it necessary to reduce the regular budget appropriation of $201 million by $24 million.
 While that reduction of about 12 per cent in the regular budget has been spread across the board, we are especially concerned by its negative effect on the departments concerned with technical cooperation.
 Pakistan has not only pledged, but has paid in full, its target contribution for technical cooperation programmes.
 While much more needs to be done in the area of technical cooperation, certain initiatives undertaken by the Technical Cooperation Department of the Agency in 1993 deserve to be commended, particularly the successful launching of the model project initiative.
 We welcome the approval under that initiative of a key project on the eradication of cotton pests in Pakistan.
 The Agency's initiative to help Member States become self-sufficient in training operators, managers and technical personnel must be encouraged.
 In that regard, the Agency might consider supporting selected national training centres in order to develop them and upgrade them into regional centres.
 Pakistan has always supported activities related to the enhancement of nuclear safety.
 We have participated actively in meetings of the Technical Committee held to prepare and finalize the International Basic Safety Standards.
 Pakistan was among the original signatories of the Convention on Nuclear Safety.
 The success of that Convention will depend in large measure on the implementation of provisions relating to cooperation between the industrially advanced countries and the developing countries.
 It is through continued and unimpeded supply of safety-related information and equipment that the safety of nuclear facilities can be assured and enhanced.
 Such measures for nuclear safety would be reinforced by an international agreement prohibiting attacks against all nuclear facilities.
 Pakistan has endeavoured to promote such an agreement.
 The Agency can play an important role in its realization.
 In this context, we are greatly encouraged by the adoption of the IAEA General Conference resolutions relating to the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in Africa and the Middle East.
 The objectives of safeguards activities should be realized without causing a gross imbalance in the allocation of resources between the Agency's major areas of activity.
 Unfortunately, restrictions have been imposed even when it is evident that no proliferation dangers are involved.
 Since these are the Agency's key objectives, we hope it will redouble its efforts for their achievement.
 It can best do so by striving to remove all impediments in the transfer of peaceful nuclear technology.
 Mr. Albin (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation has taken note of the report introduced by Mr. Hans Blix, Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on the work done by the Agency in the course of 1993.
 We are grateful for the additional information he provided on the most important developments since the issuance of the report.
 My country has always supported the Agency's work in promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to fostering multilateral technical cooperation in this area.
 We hail the valuable work being done in the area of nuclear safety, the application of safeguards and verification - key factors in preventing the spread of nuclear weapons.
 The report before us gives a detailed account of the activities being carried out in the various areas of its mandate.
 We have noted, as in earlier years, that distinct priority has apparently been given to the application of safeguards and verification.
 Striking a better balance between these activities is essential, especially in the light of the pressing needs of a large number of developing countries in the fields of energy, human health, the environment and agriculture, among others.
 In this context, of particular note is the coming into force of the quadripartite safeguards agreement concluded among Argentina, Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC) and the IAEA.
 This was no easy task, but the hard work, perseverance and conviction of the countries of the region have brought us to the end of a process that some viewed with sympathy and others with incredulity.
 Mexico's commitment in this respect is plain and simple: to rid the Earth of the nuclear threat.
 My delegation trusts that reason and dialogue will prevail in solving differences of view in the area of security and safeguards.
 There is a pressing need to devise and implement new measures to bolster the safeguards regime before the review and extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
 To this end, we must devise and put into operation a mechanism to ensure that resources are available to finance these activities on a continuing and stable basis.
 Mr. Starr (Australia): I should like to express appreciation to the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Hans Blix, for his comprehensive and well-balanced report analysing the operation of the Agency over the last year.
 As one of the founding members, Australia has long been a strong and active supporter of the IAEA.
 The Agency's contributions to global security, through the effective operation of a safeguards system, and to global development through peaceful nuclear cooperation, are substantial and valuable.
 These contributions deserve the continuing support of the international community.
 These efforts are reflected in the achievements of the Agency over the past year.
 First, there are the important measures which have been taken to strengthen safeguards, notably through the work of the "93 plus two" programme, which is examining ways of improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards system.
 Secondly, important developments have taken place in the field of technical cooperation.
 Australia participated in the successful technical-cooperation policy review seminar in Vienna in September, and the outcomes of that seminar will have important implications for the efficient use of the Agency's technical-cooperation resources.
 The Agency, in our view, has also responded commendably to new developments in the nuclear field.
 In particular, we note the Agency's role in strengthening international cooperation against trafficking in nuclear materials and its potential role in verifying new arms-control arrangements, such as a cut-off in nuclear production.
 We encourage the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to reconsider that decision and urge it to cooperate fully with the Agency.
 Importantly, the efforts of the negotiators of the draft resolution in Vienna have been respected through the maintenance of language adopted by the Board of Governors and the General Conference.
 We have a common interest in seeing the maintenance and strengthening of the IAEA and the protection and development of its activities which promote the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
 I would also like to extend our support to him and his staff in the secretariat for their dedicated efforts and achievements in the IAEA's various activities during the past 12 months.
 The reinforcement of a global non-proliferation regime continues to be an essential requirement not only for ensuring stability in today's world but also in shaping a new world order built on peace and security.
 Over the past several years, the international community has substantially increased its awareness of the vital importance of an effective global nuclear non-proliferation regime, with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and IAEA safeguards at its core.
 The recent increase in the number of parties to the NPT to 165 States, including all nuclear-weapons States, is a highly encouraging development.
 We also welcome the initiatives taken by the African States for the establishment of a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the region.
 We earnestly hope that the international community can build upon these positive developments and carry out constructive discussions which will lead to the indefinite extension of the NPT beyond 1995.
 However, new problems have arisen which present serious challenges to the NPT regime and its safeguards system.
 The non-compliance of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with the NPT safeguards obligations and some incidents of illicit nuclear-material trafficking in Europe are cases requiring the renewed efforts of the international community towards the strengthening of the NPT regime and its safeguards system.
 Given the pivotal role of the IAEA safeguards system in ensuring an effective NPT regime, my delegation would like to reiterate its full support for the safeguards activities of the Agency, particularly its efforts to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards system and to enhance its responsiveness.
 In this connection, my delegation welcomes the Agency secretariat's initiative to develop "Programme '93+2', which provides for the assessment, development and testing of recommendations submitted by the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation in 1993 and other potential measures for strengthening and improving the existing safeguards system.
 While recognizing that the measures considered in the Programme are broad in scope and diverse in nature, we sincerely hope that the Agency secretariat's concrete proposals resulting from the Programme can be submitted in the near future for in-depth consideration by the international community.
 My Government is deeply concerned about surplus plutonium and highly enriched uranium and is alarmed by recent press reports on illicit trafficking in nuclear materials.
 We welcome the initiatives taken by the European Union to enable the IAEA to discuss this important issue.
 The promotional activities of the Agency are also important, as one of its main activities under its statute.
 We continue to support the strengthening of the Agency's technical assistance and cooperation programmes, particularly the transfer of nuclear technology to developing countries.
 In this regard, we would like to commend the IAEA's increased efforts to secure predictable and assured resources for these programmes and to place special emphasis on the model projects.
 We deeply appreciate the Agency's contributions in the promotion of international cooperation in the field of nuclear safety and radioactive-waste management.
 The Convention on Nuclear Safety, which was recently signed in Vienna, will open a new era of international cooperation for the enhanced safety of nuclear-power plants, and my Government is ready to make all possible contributions for its full implementation.
 Radioactive-waste management has emerged as one of the most difficult and complex challenges in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
 In this regard, my delegation wishes to commend the Agency's initiatives to promote the Radioactive Waste Safety Standards (RADWASS) programme.
 We note with satisfaction that agreement has almost been reached on safety fundamentals and is awaiting approval at the December meeting of the IAEA's Board.
 My delegation is pleased to recall that during the thirty-eighth General Conference of the IAEA a resolution on the RADWASS programme was adopted, having been promoted by the Korean delegation and fully endorsed by the Group of 77.
 A major challenge to the NPT regime and the IAEA safeguards system is the nuclear issue relating to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
 The suspicions surrounding the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's nuclear programme should be completely cleared up by securing the past, present and future transparency of its nuclear activities.
 I wish to take this opportunity to commend the Director General and his staff, including the inspectors, for their patience and impartial efforts to discharge their responsibilities under exceptionally difficult circumstances.
 Depending on the resolution of the nuclear issue, the Republic of Korea stands ready to make its technological and capital resources available for the DPRK's overall economic development in a spirit of mutual prosperity.
 In closing, my delegation would like to reiterate the importance it attaches to the IAEA and express my Government's firm commitment to the Agency's objectives and our support for its essential role in the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
 My delegation hopes that it will be adopted by consensus.
 Mr. Dimitrov (Bulgaria): The Bulgarian delegation joins other delegations in expressing appreciation to Mr. Hans Blix and the staff of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for the competence and efficiency with which the important functions of the Agency are carried out.
 We are grateful to the Director General for the annual report and his comprehensive statement on the work of the IAEA.
 During the reporting period the IAEA continued to play a vital role in ensuring the peaceful use of nuclear energy and securing the stable functioning of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
 The efforts aimed at upholding and strengthening this regime are central to maintaining and further enhancing international peace and security.
 The Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the regime established by it are not only a fundamental instrument to maintain international security, but also a solid basis for a verifiable framework for peaceful cooperation between States Parties.
 As we prepare for the Treaty's 1995 Review and Extension Conference, it is appropriate to reiterate that Bulgaria supports the achievement of its universality and complete implementation, and advocates its indefinite and unconditional extension.
 We urge all States that have not yet done so to accede to the Treaty and to conclude full-scope safeguards agreements with the IAEA.
 There can be confidence in the international non-proliferation regime only when States are completely transparent with regard to their nuclear activities.
 Full cooperation with the IAEA, which administers the nuclear non-proliferation system on behalf of the international community, is essential.
 The right of the Agency to perform special inspections where necessary must be upheld.
 As a last resort, the backing of the Security Council may be needed.
 Recognizing the outstanding role of the Agency in the implementation of the NPT, we are pleased to note that the recent third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 1995 NPT Conference expressed high appreciation for IAEA's activities in preparing this important event.
 The Republic of Bulgaria continues to attach great importance to the interrelationship of the Agency's main activities - safeguards, safety and technology transfer.
 Ensuring the safety of nuclear installations, managing radioactive waste, promoting various applications of nuclear technology and providing technical assistance - all these activities depend on the confidence that nuclear energy and technology are used exclusively for peaceful purposes.
 Bulgaria supports the Agency's programme for a strengthened and more cost-effective safeguards system, which, in our view, should be capable of providing reliable assurances of the peaceful nature of the nuclear activities of States, including the detection of undeclared materials.
 The Agency's role in this field is of increasing importance in the context of recent developments regarding the nuclear issue concerning the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
 Bulgaria views the IAEA as the principal international forum for the exchange of safety-related information.
 We believe that nuclear safety worldwide would be enhanced through combining national measures and international cooperation in this area.
 Radioactive waste is another topical issue for my delegation.
 We support the elaboration of an international convention on the safety of radioactive waste management, once the ongoing process of formulating waste management safety fundamentals has resulted in a broad international agreement.
 In our view, the convention should be as wide as possible in scope, including civil as well as military waste.
 Under a supplementary provision of that law, Bulgaria will apply the Vienna Convention as of the day of its ratification before its formal entry into force.
 Technology transfer, which is one of the IAEA's major activities, is of great interest to my country.
 The numerous beneficiaries of the technical cooperation programs, Bulgaria among them, testify to the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
 Nuclear power remains the sole alternative for meeting Bulgaria's needs for electric power.
 Over the period from l974 to 1993 six Kozloduy power units, designed and furnished by the former USSR, were put into operation consecutively.
 Between 1991 to 1994 large-scale activities, aimed at enhancing the safety of the four reactors of the older model, have been carried out; the work includes a special programme for reconstruction and upgrading of the reactors.
 Thirty-seven Bulgarian companies and institutes and more than 20 companies from the United States of America, the Russian Federation, Germany, France, Belgium, Finland, Spain, the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic participated in the implementation of the programme.
 The Kozloduy nuclear-power plant is a successful example of efficient international cooperation aimed at solving safety-related problems.
 The coordinating role of the IAEA in this cooperation is of paramount importance and we intend to develop nuclear power further while strictly observing safety rules and in close cooperation with the Agency.
 I should like to express the deep gratitude of the Bulgarian Government to the IAEA, the European Commission, other international institutions and the Governments of friendly States for their help, which has guaranteed the reliable and safe operation of our nuclear-power-generating capacities.
 In parallel with efforts aimed at further improving the safety of our nuclear-power plants, we will continue to broaden the application of nuclear methods in other areas, such as agriculture and medicine.
 For its part, Bulgaria will do its best to contribute to the successful implementation of the Agency's programmes for technical assistance and cooperation.
 All nuclear-weapon States are now parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
 South Africa has abandoned its nuclear-weapons programme, thus offering prospects for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone on the African continent.
 Latin America is also emerging as a nuclear-weapon-free continent.
 In view of the 1995 NPT review and extension Conference, these facts are very promising.
 May I reiterate, in this context, that Romania is deeply interested in and committed to achieving the universality of the NPT and supports the unconditional and indefinite extension of this Treaty.
 We urge all States that have not yet done so to become parties to the NPT and to conclude full-scope safeguards agreements with the IAEA.
 The activities and decisions of the recent IAEA General Conference offer a meaningful picture of the responsibilities assumed and action taken by the Agency in carrying out its mandate for promoting the non-proliferation regime.
 Romania is very appreciative of the work done so far by the Agency and its recent additional steps towards a strengthened and more cost-effective safeguards system.
 The purpose of such an endeavour is clear: to make the safeguards system more capable of covering both declared and undeclared activities, thus providing sufficiently convincing assurances for all States about the exclusively peaceful nature of the nuclear programmes of other States.
 An important additional serious challenge to the international non-proliferation system is the illicit traffic in nuclear material.
 Here, in our opinion, urgent domestic and international action is necessary.
 We support the idea of establishing an international register for fissile material.
 An emerging IAEA task relevant to this context would be to facilitate the exchange of safety-related information.
 In a world which needs energy and is at the same time concerned about the risks of environmental deterioration, high priority must be given to nuclear safety and radiation protection.
 The expanded nuclear-safety programme, which was adopted after the Chernobyl accident, has had positive effects.
 We continue to be seriously concerned over the status of certain old nuclear reactors situated in our region.
 The IAEA has made remarkable efforts to assess and improve their safety and we hope that these efforts will continue.
 Romania is already a party to the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and the Joint Protocol relating to the application of the Vienna and Paris Conventions.
 At the last session of the IAEA General Conference, my country signed the Convention on Nuclear Safety.
 We support the idea of a special convention on the safety of radioactive waste.
 Draft resolution A/49/L.2, sponsored by a large number of delegations, including my own, reflects in an adequate and balanced manner the state of affairs in such a responsible and sensitive area as that of the IAEA activities.
 Recent, and especially future, challenges for the Agency and its member States are reflected in this document.
 We hope that it will be adopted by consensus.
 Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): On behalf of the delegation of Nigeria, I wish to thank the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for his introductory statement highlighting the Agency's achievements in the past year, as well as the challenges it faces in the coming years.
 Those achievements detailed in the annual report for 1993 reflect the widespread support for the Agency's programmes among Member States.
 They reflect also the continuing commitment of Mr. Hans Blix and his able staff to the goals of the Agency, for which we are equally grateful.
 The Agency has consolidated those activities through the application of molecular techniques in areas as varied as insect eradication, potable-water development and water-resources management, and genetic improvement of food crops.
 It has expanded the horizons of nuclear techniques through food irradiation and is now in the process of placing great emphasis on staple foods, as part of a joint effort with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) to strengthen food security in developing countries, including those in Africa.
 Its contributions in the areas of medicine and industry have enhanced the development of indigenous capabilities in applied radiation biology and radiotherapy and strengthened the scientific and technological content of industry in recipient countries.
 It is reassuring to observe that, in response to the requests of Member States, the formulation of the Agency's technical-assistance programme is now based on their national development priorities and is in consonance with the demands of sustainable development and environmental protection.
 The technical-cooperation model project concept, warmly embraced by Member States, symbolizes the new orientation that should ensure more tangible benefits from nuclear techniques for developing countries.
 They merit great support.
 The case for more secure and assured funding for those activities has never been in doubt.
 A growing awareness of the need in the post-cold-war era to shift the focus away from proliferation to peaceful uses of nuclear energy calls for the political will to place those activities on a firmer footing.
 In urging Member States to cooperate in identifying more meaningful ways of funding technical-cooperation activities, we wish to join the appeal for more pledges to the Technical Assistance and Cooperation Fund and for payments to be made in full and in a timely manner.
 Permit me, in this connection, to place on record our appreciation to a number of Africa's development partners that have continued to fund projects identified under the African Regional Cooperation Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (AFRA).
 As a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), my country highly values the Agency's safeguards role in sustaining trust and confidence in the non-proliferation regime.
 That is why we have provided unflinching support to the Agency in its efforts to ensure that non-proliferation undertakings made by NPT States parties under safeguards agreements are complied with.
 Inevitably, the increased membership of the Agency, the process of disarmament, and regional non-proliferation needs will impose additional responsibilities on the safeguards system.
 We are encouraged to note that, in anticipation of this development, new approaches are already being considered by the Board of Governors.
 Nigeria's active participation in the regional efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa is predicated on our abiding commitment to non-proliferation in our region and in the world at large.
 We note with satisfaction that after a number of productive sessions by the United Nations/Organization of African Unity Group of Experts, a draft African nuclear-weapon-free-zone treaty is in the process of being finalized.
 The verification role envisaged for the Agency in the draft treaty reflects confidence in its safeguards system, as well as our appreciation of the benefits that an assured peaceful use of nuclear energy would bring for our development.
 Similar verification functions would be assigned to the Agency under the proposed comprehensive test-ban treaty as well as the cut-off convention called for by the Assembly in its resolution last year.
 The Agency's proven expertise, accumulated over the years, will serve us all well in confronting those challenges.
 Nigeria has therefore welcomed well-conceived measures by Member States to strengthen nuclear safety world-wide.
 The unanimous adoption of the Convention on Nuclear Safety at a diplomatic conference in Vienna last June represents one such initiative, and my country was one of the first signatories of that Convention in the course of the thirty-eighth session of the IAEA General Conference.
 That would increase public confidence in the nuclear industry.
 As one of the countries which have subscribed to the code of practice on the international movement of radioactive waste, my country appreciates ongoing efforts to evaluate the health and environmental risks posed by the dumping of high-level radioactive wastes in the Arctic Ocean.
 The Agency's programme of strengthening waste management practices within national boundaries should be complemented at the international level by cooperation to frustrate continuing attempts by unscrupulous merchants of death to dump radioactive wastes and toxic substances in the high seas.
 Closely related is the urgent need to confront the new trend in the trafficking of nuclear materials.
 The Agency needs to adapt its principal policy-making organs to the demands of our times.
 Conceived at the height of the cold war, the provisions of its Statute governing representation on the Board of Governors need urgent revision to reflect new and important developments and the expansion in the membership of the Agency.
 We urge member States not to allow current divergences of approach to the subject to detract from the merit of a solution that will make the Agency inclusive as well as address the deserved case of the African region.
 Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): The delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran notes with satisfaction the annual report of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for 1993, which summarizes the significant achievements of the Agency during the year in question.
 We thank Mr. Blix, the Director General of the IAEA, for his thorough and informative statement featuring the progress as well as the challenges in the activities of the Agency during the year.
 Director General Blix and the IAEA secretariat are to be commended for the commitment and dedication with which they carry out their responsibilities.
 We have given serious consideration to the Agency's report for 1993.
 At the same time, we believe that in view of the present budgetary constraints the key objective should be cost-effectiveness.
 Another issue in the activities of the Agency during this period has been the development of a strengthened safeguards regime.
 Iran, as an original signatory of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), has always adhered to the Agency's safeguards and will continue to support their effectiveness.
 Our Government has pursued an open and transparent policy in this respect, and, based on this policy, took the initiative to invite the Agency twice to visit the nuclear facilities in Iran and to verify their peaceful utilization.
 Subsequently IAEA missions visited Iran in February 1992 and November 1993, and verifications were established to the satisfaction of the Agency.
 We call upon the international community, and the IAEA in particular, to address this problem urgently and effectively.
 It should be recalled that it was only South Africa's accession to the NPT and the IAEA safeguards regime which made the African nuclear-weapon-free zone a reality.
 As long as Israel, with the full support of certain Powers, refuses to accede to the NPT and the IAEA safeguards regime, the Middle East nuclear-weapon-free zone remains a distant goal.
 In this respect, the decision of the thirty-eighth session of the General Conference of the IAEA to restore technical assistance to Israel is nothing but a reward to a nuclear proliferator and tacit approval of that regime's access to nuclear weapons.
 Iran, as a country that in 1974 initiated the proposal for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, continues to support that initiative and is prepared to consider any constructive idea for its realization under United Nations auspices.
 The Islamic Republic of Iran attaches great importance to international cooperation in the peaceful application of nuclear energy and has pursued with great interest the Agency's promotional role in this field.
 My delegation appreciates the useful technical cooperation the Agency extends to member States in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the field of agriculture, industry and medicine.
 The 1995 NPT review and extension Conference provides a good opportunity to address the violations of the provisions of the Treaty by a number of nuclear-weapon States and other industrialized countries.
 In conclusion, allow me once again to extend our appreciation of and support for the IAEA in its efforts to promote international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
 In the past year the IAEA has done useful work and achieved some success in promoting international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in preventing nuclear proliferation.
 Notwithstanding this, it is obvious to the international community that the imbalance between the promotional and regulatory functions of the IAEA still exists and that many of the legitimate aspirations and demands of the many developing Member States have failed to receive adequate attention.
 The firm policy of the Chinese Government is to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to make nuclear energy better serve China's economic and social development and benefit the Chinese people.
 China's nuclear-power industry has entered a new stage of development. The Qinshan 300-megawatt nuclear-power station had started operation, and the second phase of that project is under full construction.
 In this connection the international community has great expectations of the Agency.
 China is prepared to work with other countries for the smooth performance of the Agency's important missions and to make new contributions to peace and development.
 Mr. Pak Gil Yon (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): The fundamental resolution of the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula is of great importance in defusing the tensions and establishing a lasting peace on the Korean peninsula.
 However, we suspended its implementation when the United States requested us to do so during the first round of the talks between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the United States.
 This has accordingly placed our country in a special status.
 We made arrangements for a sufficient number of inspections by the IEAE necessary for the continuation of the safeguards and even permitted, last May, additional inspections commensurate with our special status.
 However, some elements of the IAEA abused our good faith and our magnanimity, thus displaying ever-greater partiality and placed more pressure upon us, thereby creating difficulties and complications in the resolution of the issue.
 Worse still, they forced us to open military sites, insisting upon a "special inspection", and went as far as to enforce the adoption of the resolution on sanctions against our country at the meeting last June of the IAEA's Board of Governors, despite opposition from many countries.
 Such attempts led us to conclude that the pressure against our country would continue to increase and that our peaceful nuclear activities would be impeded if we continued to remain tied to the partial framework of the IAEA.
 The forcible adoption of the unreasonable "resolution on sanctions" against our country constitutes a gross infringement of the dignity and sovereignty of our Republic, which holds independence as dear as life itself.
 Therefore, on June 13 of this year, we took the step of withdrawing from the IAEA.
 In addition, he put forward an important proposal for bridging the impasse between the two countries and fundamentally resolving the nuclear issue.
 Accordingly, we allowed Agency inspectors to remain and to continue the inspections necessary for the continuation of the safeguards.
 The Director General of the Agency referred to this in his report to the September meeting of the Board of Governors of the IAEA.
 Our willingness to freeze graphite-moderated reactors is an expression of our firm pledge to resolve the nuclear issue and a demonstration of the transparency and credibility of our denuclearization policy, which is aimed at the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
 After the announcement of the agreed statement, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the United States held expert-level talks in Pyongyang and Berlin, respectively, in early September and are continuing their ongoing negotiations, thus moving towards the actual implementation of the agreed statement.
 Some circles, however, that still retain outdated concepts and the mentality of the cold war, have attempted to renew the pressure against us.
 They placed the so-called nuclear issue - unreasonably - on the agenda of the thirty-eighth General Conference of the IAEA, held last September, and forced the adoption of the "resolution" despite opposition from many countries.
 Furthermore, we find it annoying that they are trying to adopt a resolution on the "nuclear issue", clamouring about the "transparency of past nuclear activities", a "return to the NPT" and a "special inspection", even at this meeting to consider the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
 This "nuclear issue" of ours, in view of its character, is not an issue to be considered at the United Nations.
 This notwithstanding, any attempt to adopt a resolution in this United Nations forum, while disregarding our sincere efforts, would be a totally unreasonable act, detrimental to the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
 Such unreasonable acts on the part of some countries are designed to trample the sovereignty of other countries and nations, and are based on the idea of maximizing their interests.
 We hold that this sacred forum, where peace-loving, independent and sovereign States come together to discuss the ways and means of accomplishing a noble desire of humankind, should not be used as a political tool by some countries bent on dominating and stifling small and weak countries.
 Therefore we demand that the paragraphs in draft resolution A/49/L.2 that could be an obstacle to these talks be deleted and be replaced with paragraphs welcoming the agreed statement between the two countries and encouraging its full implementation.
 Having reiterated our position, we express our expectation that representatives hoping for a negotiated and peaceful solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula will give our position their full support.
 It should be clearly understood that ordinary military sites cannot be the object of special inspection and that any attempt at such inspection would constitute a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and supreme interests of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea will never sell off its interests under pressure.
 According to data released by the Japanese Science and Technology Agency, it has already stockpiled 1.6 tonnes of plutonium at home and 2.9 tonnes abroad and by the year 2010 will possess 50 tonnes - a quantity large enough to make more than 6,200 nuclear bombs.
 The annual capacity of Japan's reprocessing plant is 800 tonnes - the largest in the world.
 It is an open secret that Japan has already developed not only an electronic detonating device and other components for the manufacture of nuclear bombs and for associated technology but also the means of long-range nuclear delivery, which could be used as intercontinental ballistic missiles.
 Japan's undisguised ambition in the field of nuclear armaments is more clearly revealed in an official document that was submitted to the International Court of Justice.
 All these facts indicate that Japan's progress in the field of nuclear armaments has reached a dangerous pace.
 Japan's acceleration in this field is creating an obstacle to the process of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula, and it poses a grave threat not only to regional peace and security but also to the international non-proliferation system.
 Therefore my delegation strongly urges Japan to make public and to abandon its nuclear-armaments scheme and to invite the International Atomic Energy Agency to inspect its undeclared nuclear activities, instead of trying to meddle in other issues.
 It is an open secret that South Korea is now developing nuclear weapons under the patronage of the United States and some other Western countries.
 South Korea has already stockpiled a great quantity of plutonium, has concluded a contract on its importation with the United Kingdom and France and - worse still - has recently brought a heavy-water reactor into operation.
 I remind members that, pursuant to decision 34/401, statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and five minutes for the second, and should be made by delegations from their seats.
 Mr. Takahashi (Japan): The arguments raised by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with regard to Japan are totally groundless and cannot be regarded as anything but vicious propaganda.
 Japan, which is poor in energy resources, utilizes nuclear fuel that is extracted by processing plutonium from spent fuel.
 By doing so, Japan anticipates that it will be able to maintain a stable supply of energy through nuclear-power generation.
 It remains committed to handling the waste contained in spent fuel in a safe and appropriate manner.
 Japan uses such materials strictly for peaceful purposes and in accordance with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and with domestic laws and regulations.
 The peaceful use of atomic energy in Japan is also guaranteed and verified by the IAEA's comprehensive safeguards.
 Furthermore, Japan strictly upholds its three non-nuclear principles of not possessing or producing nuclear weapons or introducing them into its territory.
 Mr. Chong-Ha Yoo (Republic of Korea): I shall confine my statement in exercise of the right of reply to essential matters.
 Mr. Kim Jae Hom (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): The South Korean authorities, who have no say at all about foreign nuclear weapons deployed on their own land, are now harping on the nuclear issue.
 Regarding the remarks by Japan, I urge the Japanese delegation not to make poor excuses.
 Mr. Takahashi (Japan): I would like to reiterate my previous statement that the arguments raised by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with regard to Japan are totally groundless and cannot be regarded as anything but vicious propaganda.
 We urge North Korea not to waste time by engaging in meaningless arguments and propaganda.
 I urge Japan to give up its wild, big nuclear schemes, and to give up its wild ambition to lecture other Asian countries.
 Otherwise, Japan will not enjoy a place in the international community.
 The President (interpretation from French): I would like to inform members that action on the draft resolution on agenda item 14 will be taken at the afternoon meeting on Wednesday, 19 October 1994.
 The President (interpretation from French): I would also like to inform members that the General Assembly will take up agenda item 152, entitled "Observer status for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in the General Assembly," at the afternoon meeting on Wednesday, 19 October 1994.
 Mr. Butler (Australia): As this is the first occasion on which I have come to the rostrum under your presidency, Sir, may I renew the warm congratulations expressed to you by my Foreign Minister, Senator Evans, when he spoke in the Assembly on 3 October 1994.
 This makes a total of 113 Member States sponsoring the draft resolution.
 The South Pacific Forum, which first met in 1971, is the political grouping of the 15 independent or self-governing States in the South Pacific.
 It meets annually, at Heads of Government level, to develop collective responses on a wide range of regional issues, including trade, economic development, civil aviation and maritime issues, telecommunications, energy, and political and security matters.
 In addition, the South Pacific Forum maintains a dialogue, following each Heads of Government meeting, with a number of external Governments and organizations.
 The South Pacific Forum is supported by the Forum secretariat, which has its headquarters in Suva, Fiji, and was first established as an international organization pursuant to the 1973 Agreement establishing the South Pacific Bureau for Economic Cooperation.
 The Forum secretariat is headed by a secretary-general, and it is a very great honour to have with us today the Honourable Ieremia Tabai, the current Secretary-General, who has come to New York for the consideration of the Forum's request for observer status.
 Since its inception, the Forum has played a vital role in promoting closer cooperation and consideration of a range of issues of direct relevance to the South Pacific region and beyond.
 The theme for the 1994 Forum was "Managing our Resources".
 This encompassed consideration of the development of human resources in the region, managing forestry resources and their exploitation, the development of fisheries and their associated industries, land-use concerns and their relationship to sustainable development, and the growth of tourism.
 As a regional organization, the South Pacific Forum wishes to strengthen its relationship with the United Nations.
 Observer status for the South Pacific Forum will, in this regard, provide a means of contributing to and cooperating with the United Nations system for all the 15 members of the Forum.
 The President (interpretation from French): I should like to inform the Assembly that Madagascar has joined the list of sponsors of the draft resolution.
 The President (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of Canada, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
 Ms. Fr\x{5db0}hette (Canada): On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States, I would like to welcome the South Pacific Forum as a Permanent Observer in the General Assembly.
 In seeking this status for the Forum, its member States and Governments have made clear their desire to strengthen the Forum's relationship with the United Nations and to intensify cooperation in areas which are of particular interest to the South Pacific region.
 Such an area is that of the sustainable development of small island States.
 We have no doubt that the South Pacific Forum will make a valuable contribution to the work of the Organization on this and other issues of mutual interest.
 We look forward to fruitful and effective cooperation with our new Permanent Observer.
 The President: I call on the representative of Samoa, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
 Mr. Slade (Samoa): Since this is the first time I have spoken here, I want to add the voice of my delegation to the many tributes paid you, Sir, and the admiration expressed upon your election as President of the General Assembly.
 It is an acknowledgement, too, of the response by the South Pacific Forum countries to the call by the United Nations for a more active dialogue and closer cooperation between the United Nations system and regional organizations.
 We see in the observer status granted to the Forum today significant prospects for the further strengthening of regional contributions by small developing States towards the processes of global consensus-building now taking place on critical issues affecting the environment, population, poverty, trade and other areas of our work.
 All these will require effective and efficient coordination, such as between the United Nations and the regional bodies.
 By the outcome of a number of conferences - in Rio, in other places and most recently in Barbados - the world community has assigned tasks of magnitude and importance to the regional intergovernmental organizations.
 Let me, on behalf of the Asian Group, congratulate the South Pacific Forum again and to extend to the Secretary-General of the Forum, His Excellency Mr. Ieremia Tabai, a warm welcome and the good wishes of our membership.
 The President: I call on the representative of the Czech Republic, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
 Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic): On behalf of the Group of Eastern European States, allow me to congratulate warmly the South Pacific Forum on the occasion of its being granted observer status in the General Assembly.
 The Eastern European Group's members, 10 of which sponsored the resolution granting observer status to the South Pacific forum, are looking forward to our future cooperation with the Forum at the United Nations.
 The President: In accordance with the resolution just adopted, I now call on the Secretary-General of the South Pacific Forum, the Honourable Ieremia Tabai.
 Mr. Tabai (South Pacific Forum): It is a great privilege to be here today to represent the South Pacific Forum as it takes for the first time a seat as an observer in the General Assembly.
 This is indeed a historic event for us, marking another milestone for our small organization as it tries to expand its role in representing the joint interests of its 15 members in the international arena.
 We deeply appreciate the support and understanding that Members of the United Nations have demonstrated in adopting this resolution.
 The United Nations is, of course, an Organization of immense and growing importance to all members of the international community.
 But it is, I think, of particular importance to the smaller island States.
 Its existence and programmes can help guarantee our peace and security and promote our economic and social development in ways which we are too small to manage entirely for ourselves.
 Although our countries extend over a vast area of ocean, their total population is only about 25 million.
 Despite these limitations of size and resources, however, I think that the Forum has established a solid track record in the nearly quarter of a century of its existence of effective regional cooperation.
 Our acceptance as an observer into the United Nations marks another and very important step forward for the Forum's international links.
 We greatly welcome that, and in particular the greater emphasis that is now being placed by the Secretary- General on cooperation in the United Nations work programme with regional organizations.
 We do, of course, have much existing cooperation with the United Nations specialized and regional agencies.
 But we are very interested also in the many new areas of work and new developments in old areas where previously the constraints of the cold war's international framework had prevented progress.
 We have noted and greatly welcomed, for example, the Secretary-General's Agenda for Peace.
 The Forum has in particular a long-standing position of vigorous support for disarmament, especially nuclear disarmament, and opposition to nuclear testing.
 Our region has direct and recent experience of the hazards of such testing.
 Although our populations in the South Pacific are in absolute terms small, they are in a number of our countries growing at some of the highest rates in the world.
 Population densities are already very high in some of our atoll countries in particular and are putting immense pressure on our fragile marine and terrestrial ecosystems.
 For this same reason, we have a deep interest in the United Nations growing environmental programme.
 Forum members have participated actively in the development of the agenda stemming from the Rio Conference two years ago and in the newly launched work of the Commission on Sustainable Development.
 The Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, held in Barbados earlier this year, was particularly important in that regard.
 Six members of the Forum, however, do not belong to the United Nations.
 The Forum hopes that taking up observer status in the General Assembly is a useful initial step in responding to the Secretary-General's invitation to regional organizations to consider ways and means to improve coordination of effort with the United Nations.
 We know it will require a real effort on our part to turn this institutional mechanism into substantive cooperation and consultation.
 I thank the Assembly again most sincerely for admitting the South Pacific Forum to observer status and for allowing me to make this short statement.
 The President (interpretation from French): I should like to remind representatives of the need for punctuality, as I intend to begin our work tomorrow at 10 a.m. and not a minute later.
 The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.
 I am pleased to welcome participants to this International Conference on Families.
 Their attendance is a most fitting response to the decision of the General Assembly last year that this Conference should take place at an appropriate global policy-making level.
 Their presence today, just as this event itself does, is a tribute to families throughout the world and a testimony to the importance and high priority that the global community attaches to families and to family issues in the process of sustainable development.
 The International Conference on Families is taking place at a time when humanity is facing a defining moment for its common future.
 The realities, opportunities and challenges facing human civilization today present a vastly different picture than in the last decade.
 As a result, the United Nations has begun to elaborate an increasingly refined and effective conceptual base in order to cope with today's realities in our endeavours in various spheres.
 Numerous recent events and initiatives have greatly contributed to this evolutionary process in their respective spheres and have played a significant role to this end.
 The same will be true of other, forthcoming events, such as the World Summit for Social Development.
 By proclaiming 1994 the International Year of the Family, the General Assembly acknowledged the significant role that another essential element of society the families as the basic social unit could play in the context of this process.
 However, just as other socio-political institutions throughout the world have been undergoing profound transformations, particularly in recent years, the family, which is the most fundamental of social institutions, has also undergone great upheavals in an age that also gives it new opportunities and unprecedented challenges.
 On the one hand, present-day socio-political realities have heightened the importance and responsibilities of families and have made their role even more vital.
 They also reinforce the essential function of families in the building of a just civil society and in our global efforts for peace and sustainable development.
 On the other hand, one often sees negative behaviour and exploitation within the family.
 These are tolerated precisely because of the intimate nature of family relationships, and because of them all family members cannot enjoy their individual rights on an equal footing.
 Hence, families as democratic social units remain an ideal that does not correspond entirely to reality.
 Clearly, the current state of the world's families is a vital factor that can influence the pace of social progress and development.
 As the International Conference on Families opens, the international community is fast approaching the completion of the first phase of its important efforts to give the family greater consideration.
 Great strides have been made in fulfilling this objective.
 We have also seen that an especially constructive approach to family-related problems has come about in the course of the Year.
 The various phases of the observances of the Year have also included well-conceived promotional and public-information strategies and activities.
 The hard work of mobilizing energies and striving for more sustained activities still lies ahead of us.
 I wish to pay a well-deserved tribute to our numerous partners in the International Year of the Family for their effective action and their financial and in-kind contributions.
 Both the preparatory phase and the observance of the Year have been orchestrated by the secretariat of the Year, which has effectively played the roles of catalyst, promoter and coordinator of national and international efforts.
 We must welcome this example of good management of resources and rationalization of work.
 The successes achieved by the International Year of the Family, impressive as they already are, also set high standards for this Conference.
 Through deliberations with regard to the Year, Member States should be able to articulate even more solid principles on which to base our future action for the family.
 We should provide a clear direction for such action and begin to mark out its modalities and priorities.
 The General Assembly has requested that the secretariat submit a draft plan of action on the family at the Assembly's fiftieth session, and our deliberations should also be a very useful instrument in the accomplishment of that task.
 The Secretary-General: Five years ago, the General Assembly decided that 1994 was to be the International Year of the Family.
 Some people argued that support for the family discriminates against those who prefer to live outside family units.
 There were also disagreements over the activities which should be organized to mark the year.
 And so, in my speech last December to launch this International Year, I urged that we concentrate on practical outcomes: the Year should result in concrete measures to strengthen the situation of the family around the world.
 Today I can report that a great deal of practical action is indeed being taken, and more is planned.
 But I can also report that in one key respect this International Year of the Family has already exceeded expectations.
 The International Year of the Family has stimulated a worldwide debate.
 Many political notions have been clarified.
 Out of the process of debate and reflection have come new insights.
 Instead of confusion and hesitation, there is now consensus about the role of the family in human society.
 It is accepted that the family is a fundamental institution of human society.
 Indeed, it is established that society is a structure made up of families and individuals related to society, in the first instance, through families.
 Like the State, the nation and this world Organization itself, the family is a living, functioning organism, which has to cope with the many profound changes which are occurring in the world.
 It has also been recognized that families have many needs and that in many societies families are under stress.
 It is clear that all areas of social policy affect families.
 But families also need support.
 Policies should therefore be made sensitive to the situation of families.
 The aim must be to empower families to fulfil all their roles and functions in society.
 The two have overlapped, and, as a result, it is now generally accepted that action to support families is an important component of the development effort generally.
 Families are major actors in and beneficiaries of the sustainable development process.
 Without the participation of families in the development process, it cannot succeed.
 As producers and as educators, families play a significant role in human development.
 In these and in many other ways, families are the primary mechanisms through which the human community achieves its ends.
 Families are universally recognized as important actors in education.
 They are the building blocks of communities and cities.
 The importance of families for the well-being and development of children is a point of long-standing, universal consensus.
 The decisions taken in families are at the centre of such questions as population growth, economic development and environmental protection.
 A focus on families helps to build bridges between disciplines, policy sectors and professions.
 It provides a mechanism for coherent action at the basic level of human life.
 The family is the first and primary conduit for human rights education.
 Children raised in a family where tolerance and gender equality are practised will have the best human rights education.
 The experience of fairness and social justice provides the best assurance that these values will be sought in the greater society.
 It has shown that the international community can mobilize action at the grass-roots level and find unity of purpose in a pluralistic world.
 The Year of the Family is proof of a new political will and a new capacity for solving global problems through the basic units of society.
 They have begun long-term processes of benefit to families.
 The Year has also drawn guidance from an array of disciplines.
 Its strength testifies to the power of a family focus.
 Its global appeal derives from the universal significance of families to the human experience.
 Through the International Year of the Family from the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, the World Conference on Human Rights and the International Conference on Population and Development new insights, new principles and a new vision are emerging.
 The year 1995 will also see the World Summit for Social Development and the World Conference on Women at Beijing.
 This will be a time for reflection and thinking, especially about development issues.
 The challenge now is to ensure that the momentum gained in the course of the preparation and observance of the Year is maintained.
 Mechanisms for future action are already in place.
 National coordinating bodies have been a catalytic force in mobilizing action in countries all around the world.
 Some Governments have acted already.
 Some have set up ministries with a specific mandate for family policy.
 From its heights to its most basic level the human family must be united in its dedication to a sustainable future for all people.
 The International Year of the Family has provided a starting-point.
 Looking back over the past few years it now seems extraordinary that the importance of the family as a human institution should ever have been regarded as controversial. But it is now clear that there has been a geological change in political attitudes.
 Today, it is recognized that the family is a key institution in the social structure of every human society.
 Indeed, precisely because of its importance, opinions differed as to the role, function and future of the family.
 Today, in a new spirit of pragmatism, the world is acknowledging the importance of families.
 The United Nations will honour the many accomplishments of the Year. The United Nations will continue to support families at the international level.
 Before calling on the next speaker, I should like to propose that the list of speakers at the International Conference on Families be closed today at 11 a.m.
 Mrs. Osman (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): General Assembly resolution 44/82 of 1989, which designated 1994 as the International Year of the Family, reflected awareness of the fact that the family is the principal underpinning of society and the foundation of its development and progress.
 The United Nations and its specialized agencies have played a pioneering role in protecting and supporting the family and in mobilizing international cooperation in its support in the economic, social, cultural and public health areas.
 Non-governmental organizations such as the International Union of Family Organizations have undertaken ambitious projects at the international, regional and local levels to prepare for the International Year of the Family.
 I do not intend to speak at length of our successes in this field, but I should like to focus on two of them.
 The first success was in the social-security area.
 We have expanded the social-security umbrella to cover every Egyptian citizen, whether he or she works inside or outside the country, and thus we have guaranteed for the Egyptian family its present and future security.
 In the past financial year 5.4 million Egyptian pounds were paid out in pensions and compensations to nearly 6.7 million people.
 Among the most important schemes of insurance coverage are the following: Social-security insurance has been expanded.
 This insurance covers government, public and private sector workers under the provisions of law 79 of 1975.
 Social-security insurance covering employers and such categories under law 108 of 1977 now covers nearly 503,000 according to the figures of the past financial year.
 Social-security insurance covering street vendors and seasonal workers in agriculture, fishing, domestic services and other areas under law 112 of 1980 now covers nearly 5.4 million citizens.
 Our other success to which I should like to refer concerns productive families. This is a means of integrated development that aims at transforming the family unit into a productive unit capable of adapting to economic and social changes through redoubling the family's financial skills and capabilities.
 The project now applies to 900,000 families, with a waiting list of 1 million families which want to join the scheme.
 We in Egypt can pride ourselves today on our success in developing our disposable potential local and environmental resources and turning them into end products with added economic value.
 We have succeeded in steering social conduct towards individual and family awareness of the social value of productive behaviour.
 In addition, we have managed to preserve authentic Egyptian crafts and industries while developing the types, components and raw materials of their products.
 Proof of the success of this endeavour can be seen in 34 permanent exhibitions of family products.
 He also stressed that we should like to see the social dimension given priority in international life.
 Proceeding from this, we shall take part in the preparatory activities for international conferences which will address social issues.
 I should like to refer in particular to the World Summit on Social Development, the Fourth World Conference on Women and the Second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements.
 The Copenhagen Summit will deal with the struggle against the three-pronged problem of poverty, unemployment and social integration.
 The Beijing Summit will be aimed at enabling women, who constitute 50 per cent of society, to enjoy their rights and to increase their skills in the interests of progress and peace.
 The Istanbul Conference will be aimed at improving circumstances relating to human settlements.
 Special attention will be paid to the vulnerable sectors of society, beginning with women.
 Those Conferences are all links in the long and wider context of social development in its fullest meaning.
 The family, no matter how it may be viewed culturally, is a constant of social organization, an enduring institutional reality and a productive economic unit.
 That being the case, all Governments and international, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations should protect and promote that unit.
 Such a plan of action should be formulated in a manner that would ensure acceptance and participation by all governments, individuals and international and national organizations under the umbrella of the United Nations and its Economic and Social Council with all its subsidiary organs.
 Economic, political and cultural changes throughout the world have impacted directly on the everyday life of the family and will affect its prospects in the near and distant future.
 That is to say, the protection of the family and the preservation of its enduring cultural and material components is our collective responsibility at the local, national and international levels.
 It is undeniable that, in this respect, governments have a direct responsibility and an increasingly important role to play.
 Given the international interest in the family, we must take concrete and serious action at the international level.
 Governments must act as good conductors that ensure the swift transfer of international technological and financial assistance to their societies.
 Non-governmental organizations are required to strengthen the decentralization of national and international action on behalf of the family and through the family.
 Mrs. Burmester de Maynard (Uruguay) (interpretation from Spanish): From the very beginning of its history as a nation, Uruguay has demonstrated a firm commitment to social issues, a commitment which has shaped our concerns and actions.
 Initially, our actions were focused on strong State intervention, based on the notion of social policies as an integrating factor.
 That type of intervention, characterized by a virtual State monopoly on the supplying of social services, was designed more to consolidate a common identity as a mechanism for ensuring equal opportunity than to achieve uniform results as a strategy for combating poverty.
 Because of the characteristics of Uruguayan society at that time, positive discrimination to use a contemporary term was not thought to be an effective way of making opportunities available to the masses, or of ensuring equal treatment and uniform results.
 From a legislative standpoint, since the beginning of this century Uruguay has made significant social progress in the realms of labour, politics and civil rights.
 I shall now endeavour to describe recent years' progress in the elaboration of family-service policies.
 In that connection, the thrust of my Government's efforts has been fourfold:
 First, in 1991, we established under the aegis of the Ministry of Education and Culture, the National Institute for the Family and Women to administer Government policies in that sphere.
 The Institute's permanent status and the resources allocated to it attest to my Government's commitment.
 Its pluralistic membership includes eminent experts and in this first year of management the Commission is already demonstrating its ability to come up with proposals on concrete issues affecting families and, therefore, each and every Uruguayan.
 They are geared to providing families with better social services, thanks to institutional coordination and the support of the entire State apparatus.
 The Government of Uruguay has committed itself to Uruguayan families, to each of every one of their members, laying special emphasis on the most vulnerable sectors of the population: women, children, adolescents and the aged.
 Uruguay has a high life expectancy; senior citizens are thus among our target groups.
 In order to maximize our social services, we seek the input of all recipient groups by providing them with a forum in which to voice their expectations, needs and demands.
 To that end, in 1990, the Government adopted a national plan of action for social policies, with governmental experts and the private sector joining together in a pluralistic and participatory framework.
 We have also established a comprehensive and integrated programme of social policies, based mainly on labour, cultural and educational guidelines, to deal with the difficulties faced by families in adapting to the rapid changes and deep transformations affecting them.
 Prince Sisowath Sirirath (Cambodia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 To ensure that maximum benefit accrues to the target group, programmes have been planned, designed, executed, implemented and evaluated based on thorough research and on an analysis of the dynamics of the family unit.
 Thirdly, within the scope of the Office for Planning and Budget and under the aegis of the Presidency of the Republic, a new mechanism a social infrastructure programme has been created.
 One of its tasks is to fine-tune social policies so as to ensure optimum results.
 These three organs have demonstrated an innovative approach to social policies and made the priority needs of families in particular, families which are socially the most vulnerable the subject of decision-making at the highest levels of government.
 There being as many as 40, I shall not enumerate them.
 The six main categories, in turn, have eight interrelated programmes of action covering high-risk priority items to be dealt with in the five-year period which began in May 1992.
 Six operational programmes complete the plan: the establishment of offices in the various regions of the country, information centres to publicize the rights of women and the family, specialized libraries, activity rooms and databases.
 Most important of all, though, is our training programme, which allows us to make use of our human resources.
 Given the fact that we have this type of cross-sectoral policy, this has become the most important tool at our disposal.
 Two and a half years after its adoption the plan is 75 per cent operative, with 34 specific programmes under way.
 Programmes on the following topics are still in the research-and-analysis stage: job placement; rural women and families; teen-age mothers; heads of household; and intergenerational poverty.
 That prompts the following remarks on the family.
 If we continue to accept the present discrepancy between the actual and the ideal, we shall be sending a mixed message to children and adolescents, as well as to adults, that will only reinforce stereotypes, impose rigid models and, therefore, undermine the accepted concept of the family.
 If families today continue to aspire to unrealistic goals, it will gradually destroy the basic structure of social relations, the family; it would clearly be a step backwards.
 The stereotype of the traditional family in which the man is the breadwinner, or at least the principal provider is being eroded by the growing acceptance of unconventional, more open and, therefore, less stable relationships.
 But why not approach the problem and transform the world from the perspective of the family?
 On the day when the National Commission for the Family was established, the President of the Commission, Mrs. Maria Julia Pou de Lacalle, and wife of the President of the Republic, issued this challenge: Let us not allow the family to become the prisoner of changes in society.
 Let the family decide what changes it wants in society.
 That challenge implies pro-active families families that take responsibility for their actions families that shape events rather than yield passively to them families that contribute to society with all their vigour and with all the wisdom derived from their heterogeneity.
 Let that be our challenge.
 Let us transform society: the private sector, the public sector, the family.
 Let us be realistic: Goals that are not based on reality are, by definition, mere aspirations; they cannot be achieved.
 With support by its relevant institutions, the Government of Uruguay has commemorated this International Year of the Family with deeds and achievements.
 We hail the initiative of the United Nations in proclaiming 1994 the International Year of the Family and in holding this International Conference on Families, which will enable us to have a fruitful and enriching exchange.
 Our great challenge is to adapt family structures and dynamics so that the family becomes an agent for change.
 Let me conclude by quoting a great contemporary Uruguayan poet, Graciela Genta de Fernandez, who has always struck a receptive chord in us and in the words of another contemporary poet, Sylvia Puentes de Oyenard, given us time to live and to dream.
 Our policies must always be inspired by those values.
 I wish to leave you a world of hopes and dreams, a vast horizon that is never empty.
 Mr. Batu (Turkey): I have the honour and pleasure of speaking today on agenda item 95, the follow-up of the International Year of the Family, which has been observed by this Organization to underline the meaning of the family as a fundamental unit of society.
 I should like to take this opportunity to submit some information regarding the preparatory process for this event in Turkey, which is clearly an expression of the broad interest of our people and Government in this initiative.
 At a time when we have been living through an era of radical change, I believe the proclamation of the International Year of the Family has been a timely and appropriate occasion in order to reflect the moral values preserved by the family and the vital functions it fulfils.
 Only then will we be able to strengthen the dynamic potential of the family to reproduce its functions.
 Protecting the family and enhancing its role in society can only be attained by taking into consideration all aspects thus paving the way for the prosperity and well-being of future generations.
 It is in this spirit that my country has approached the International Year of the Family and celebrated it with the following activities.
 Furthermore, nine different research programmes on various aspects of family problems have been completed in cooperation with the universities, and three of these have been published by the Turkish Family Research Institution.
 That non-governmental organization also launched this year the Family and Society Magazine, which is being published on a regular basis.
 Numerous informative announcements and 40 drama series examining Turkish family life were broadcast on our television.
 Thousands of posters, as well as other promotional material displaying information and emblems of the International Year of the Family, were distributed throughout the country to enhance public awareness.
 In order to focus the attention of our society on this event new practical means have been used.
 In addition, low-income families with newborn babies are being supplied with an educational audio cassette series in collaboration with maternity hospitals.
 International Family Day, 15 May, was celebrated in our capital with the participation of various social organizations and non-governmental organizations, while in several other cities entertainment programmes were organized and performed.
 Additional television dramas on family life are being prepared, some of them with the cooperation of the Ministry of Culture.
 Several projects for Family Week, 10 to 16 October 1994, have been organized, and the fourth issue of Family and Society magazine will be a special issue dedicated to the International Year of the Family.
 It has further encouraged us to explore new horizons for the promotion and protection of the family.
 The observance of the Year will also be a significant prelude to important events such as the World Summit for Social Development and the fourth World Conference on Women, the work of which will directly concern the family as an institution and all its members as individuals.
 Ms. Gueddana (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic): I am grateful for this opportunity to address the Assembly.
 Since the early days of independence, in 1956, Tunisian family policy has been characterized by coherence and comprehensiveness.
 It focused on all members of the family at the legislative, economic, social, cultural and educational levels.
 The intention was to preserve the family unit and ensure its prosperity in order for it to be able to positively interact with society and continue to be its principal nucleus.
 This involved the prohibition of polygamy, the raising of the marriage age to 17 years for girls and to 20 years for boys, the regulation of divorce, and the adoption of measures that ensure the co-equality of the parents with respect to child custody.
 The reforms I speak of, side by side with the Personal Statute Code, encompassed the penal, labour and nationality codes.
 This empowered Tunisian mothers to confer their nationality upon their children from foreign husbands, with the agreement of the husband.
 The reforms introduced more stringent punishment for husband or wife in cases of domestic violence, and created maintenance-allowance funds to guarantee an income for divorced women and their offspring.
 These and other bold, well-thought-out measures demonstrate how Tunisia has approached this issue by invoking both the precepts of Islam and the needs of a democratic and open civil society.
 In the course of 1994, the International Year of the Family, Tunisia has translated these last measures into concrete reality, and has set up the structures and machinery necessary for their full implementation so that they may produce the desired results.
 Moreover, many government bodies and voluntary organizations have organized important events and waged information campaigns to familiarize the public with these measures, to popularize them and to help citizens understand their rights and duties.
 In 1994, we launched a special programme to reduce illiteracy among women in the rural areas.
 In the area of health-care services, our policy recognizes the right of every citizen to health coverage, and our health-care provision is among the best in the world.
 Mortality rates decreased from 15 per thousand in 1966 to 6.2 per thousand in 1992.
 It is worth mentioning that, in 1994, additional efforts have been made to establish health centres in the remote rural areas and to man them with the necessary staff.
 The year 1994 has been characterized also by a noticeable reinforcement of the health infrastructure, far-reaching reform of its institutions and the acquisition of modern equipment and instruments to help the health-care sector in Tunisia developing its know-how in various new fields and different medical specializations.
 Along with this health-care policy, and proceeding from our awareness that it was necessary to control population growth, in view of the positive returns of such control, we embarked, as early as 1964, on an ambitious family planning and birth-control programme, implemented by The Family and Population National Agency.
 The average birth rate fell from 39 per thousand in 1970 to 25 per thousand in 1992, whereas the composite fecundity index fell to 3.2 children, from 7.2 children in 1965.
 The year 1994 has witnessed the implementation of a special action programme for the benefit of rural families with the aim of improving the integrated family health approach that deals with family planning as one of the components of comprehensive health care.
 Human and material resources have been increased in areas still lacking appropriate coverage to promote greater use of contraceptives.
 The programme will continue to be implemented over the next few years, till it achieves its health-care and demographic objectives.
 I should also mention here that our family policy has focused increasing attention on the needs of women.
 For example, in addition to all I have referred to, Tunisia has ratified many agreements, of which I may mention the Copenhagen Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
 Agreements have been reached also with various national societies to assist such societies in providing new nurseries and improving services therein.
 His Excellency the President of the Republic, last August, adopted a decision concerning the re-examination of divorce conciliation sessions in cases where there are children in the family.
 Tunisian law provides protection for children exposed to various forms of exploitation in order to shield them from threats and dangers of all kinds.
 This is done mainly through the strengthening of punishments for those who maltreat, exploit or brutalize a child.
 Proceeding from Tunisia's firm belief that there is no dignity for any family which does not earn an appropriate income that would enable it to function properly and protect it from want, we have focused, since independence, on increasing family incomes through job creation schemes of various kinds.
 On the initiative of His Excellency President Zine El-Abidine Ben Ali, a national solidarity fund was created in 1993 to provide for those underprivileged areas and groups that are in need of the basic infrastructure of social services.
 In 1993 and 1994 alone, some 300,000 citizens have benefited from the fund, through programmes aimed at improving living conditions by providing that basic infrastructure, electricity, drinking water, schools and health centres as well as income-creating opportunities that suit the conditions of each area.
 Special financing mechanisms have been set up for the benefit of low-income families.
 Today, we can proudly state that 80 per cent of Tunisian families own their own homes.
 Social security is the best cover that protects the Tunisian family and forms a good social safety net.
 The number of people covered by social security increased sevenfold from 1964 to 1991.
 Special attention has been paid also to Tunisian nationals living abroad.
 This attention has been heightened over the past few years and has led to the creation of a government agency and a supreme council for Tunisians abroad.
 To this end, we have established a new Ministry and a Supreme Council for Women and the Family.
 Furthermore, the President of the Republic declared 11 December National Family Day, 11 January National Children's Day and 13 August National Women's Day.
 On those days, we intensify our family-oriented information campaigns with the aim of increasing public awareness of the rights and obligations of the family and of women and children.
 At the national level, our family policy is in harmony with general international trends.
 We have been focusing on the link between human rights in general and the rights of special sections of the population, such as women and children.
 Tunisia is committed to its international agreements relating to the family and the protection of its members.
 It has ratified, implemented and entrenched international treaties and conventions adopted in that area.
 This has been made evident by our participation in international and regional meetings and conferences, where we discussed a whole range of problems relating to the family.
 In addition, we have participated in all the activities of the International Year of the Family, where we expressed our views and shared our experiences.
 Many of the conclusions and recommendations adopted at that meeting focused on: First: supporting and protecting the family in order to enable it to perform its social, economic and cultural functions; Second: creating national family commissions and encouraging non-governmental organizations to participate in that effort.
 Tunisia has put this recommendation into effect by setting up the Supreme Council for Women and the Family; Third: declaring 15 May an International Day of the Family.
 This meeting is part of such effort; Fifth: promoting cooperation and the exchange of information between nations; and, Sixth: the creation of an international family centre to monitor the implementation of the various recommendations adopted and evaluate the policies enacted in this area.
 We have been actively preparing to participate in the World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in June 1995, after having participated very meaningfully in the Cairo Population Conference.
 His Excellency President Zine El-Abidine Ben Ali of Tunisia is this year's President of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
 On this subject he said,
 It is evident that we need to develop our human resources and safeguard the rights of our children in the fields of education, learning and health.
 Therefore, we have to mobilize all efforts to rescue those innocent children, because they are the very foundation of any real or lasting development.
 This is an international obligation that we must fulfil in consonance with our countries' ratification of the International Declaration on the Rights of the Child and the Plan of Action relating to the welfare of the child.
 Tunisian non-governmental organizations have taken many decisions and initiatives for the benefit of children and families in Rwanda and Bosnia and Herzegovina to help them surmount the difficulties they are now facing and to provide them with some of their basic needs.
 In our strategy we try to analyse all kinds of Tunisian policies in order to meet their needs.
 Sustainable development can be achieved only through greater solidarity between nations and through a new collective effort, taking into account the interests of all.
 The President (interpretation from French): I call first on Mr. Michael Woods, Minister for Social Welfare of Ireland.
 Mr. Woods (Ireland): I have the honour to address the General Assembly on behalf of the Government of Ireland.
 The Organization's initiative in devoting these plenary meetings to an International Conference on Families is particularly welcome.
 We have participated in and signed many Conventions, which have helped us to shape our own policies.
 We have expanded our overseas aid programmes to give greater economic and technical support to developing countries, particularly in Africa.
 Yet, for all the progress that has been made world-wide, there is still a great distance to be travelled to a world of justice, equality and respect for the individual.
 Like South Africa, the Middle East and Eastern Europe, we are coming to grips with resolving our own apparently insoluble problems.
 In doing so, we can provide a tremendous boost to our national confidence and to our international standing.
 This historic breakthrough is particularly timely in this International Year of the Family.
 Families have been the victims of the heartbreak of the past 25 years of violence in Northern Ireland. I know that all members share our earnest hope that the suffering endured by them has now finally been brought to an end.
 This International Year of the Family, now coming to a close, has given us an opportunity to highlight the importance of the family as the natural and basic unit of society.
 Unemployment is the single greatest challenge facing families today.
 Across Europe some 20 million people are unemployed.
 Because of our peripheral and demographic situation, our unemployment problem in Ireland is higher than the European average.
 It is a daunting task for any Government to create the right economic climate for employment, one that will meet not only the needs of those currently unemployed but also the hopes and aspirations of a young, emerging work force.
 This is the challenge facing my Government.
 The challenges to family life and the supports needed are issues that must be urgently considered by a developing Europe.
 The policies that lead us into the next century must provide supports and progressive options for parents and children, without distinction.
 It is a tradition which has focused on support for parents and their children.
 It is a tradition endorsed by our own Constitution, which recognizes the family as "the natural primary and fundamental unit group of society."
 Yet we have never been exclusive in the way we describe the family. Irish society has always recognized the wide-ranging nature of the family unit.
 This is nowhere more apparent than in the intergenerational relationships within the family.
 While families are smaller today, that caring tradition continues, with families increasingly taking an active part in the development of their communities.
 Ireland, with a birth-rate of 14.6 per 1000 population, is still among the highest in Europe and one of the few nations with a small, natural increase in population. Almost 50 per cent of the population in Ireland is under the age of 25.
 Almost one fifth of our population is aged 55 or over.
 In our view, the family is the bedrock of our society, the place where our children find a stable, secure and supportive environment from which to grow and in turn provide a stable and peaceful society.
 But families face other challenges, challenges posed by the changes in society itself.
 Families are getting smaller - that is evident to us all.
 But there are other changes taking place which require us to widen our perspective on the nature of families.
 These changes require a much more flexible approach in the range of supports provided for families in those circumstances.
 They must encompass not only income maintenance in the event of critical contingencies, such as illness or unemployment, but also tailor-made assistance to address the situation of the family at a particular time in its life cycle.
 In Ireland, out of a population of 3.6 million, about 800,000 people and their 700,000 dependents rely on social-welfare payments.
 Child income support is a key feature of the Government's commitment to families, with half a million families benefiting from our scheme of Child Benefit.
 Child Benefit is a universal payment which goes to almost 1 million children, irrespective of the income of the household.
 I have recently announced the setting up of a Special Committee to advise me on the future development of our child income supports in the lead-up to our annual budget next January.
 We also have support payments for workers bringing up families on low pay, as well as child-related tax-exemption allowances.
 Back-to-school allowances cover all children in families dependent on social welfare or at work on low pay.
 Older people and retired people with dependents receive additional support by way of free travel, special living-alone allowances and assistance with electricity, heating bills and television licenses.
 Beginning later this month, we will have our Survivor's Pension extended to widowers on the same terms and conditions as to widows.
 In this case, both men and women will benefit in the same way from the Survivor's Pension.
 The Irish Government is committed to a broad range of institutional, administrative and legislative reforms over the next few years, aimed at strengthening support for the family and, in particular, for women and children.
 I must mention here that, apart from the right to remarry, we already have divorce on the statute books in Ireland to all intents and purposes in the form of the Judicial Separation and Family Law Reform Act, 1989.
 Civil legal aid and advice provision and the family mediation service are also being strengthened.
 It is also planned to expand child-care facilities and to provide for adoptive leave for adopting parents.
 Protection for mothers at work is being strengthened and developed.
 Studies in Ireland have shown a strong correlation between long-term unemployment and low educational attainment. The objective of our educational schemes for the unemployed is to provide a second chance for those who, for one reason or another, never completed their formal education.
 The voluntary sector can make an inestimable contribution to the social and economic life of a country. It has a key role in developing the community, in fostering self-help and in empowering people to shape their own futures.
 In my own country, we are fortunate to enjoy an active and vibrant voluntary sector.
 It was for this reason that back in 1990 I initiated the Community Development Programme under the auspices of my Department.
 Funding is provided on a three-year basis to enable resource centres to get off the ground.
 Other programmes supporting the voluntary sector include once-off grants for capital projects undertaken by organizations to enhance their capacity and a scheme of grants for locally based women's groups, to be followed this year by a scheme of grants for men's groups.
 We had difficulty getting the men involved, but once the women were up and getting these grants, the men very soon came forward and wanted the scheme for themselves.
 It was the women who really brought them forward in the first instance, but it has certainly revitalized the community involvement in solving problems in their own communities, and particularly the problems of the disadvantaged.
 All of these initiatives have been extremely successful in empowering local communities to address the problems they encounter.
 They have developed the confidence of local people.
 Our experience has been that they can be a catalyst for local development, for enterprise and for jobs.
 I am convinced that this type of community development is the way forward.
 It can strengthen the family and provide a focal point for its development within society.
 In relation to jobs, the local community will identify many opportunities in the "micro" field.
 We hear about job creation and about small industries, but when one comes down to the reality on the ground for many local communities one is really talking about micro-industries and micro-businesses.
 It is micro-businesses in particular that will be fostered by people working in their own communities.
 For the future, then, we must preserve, promote, support and develop the strong family tradition that is to be found in Ireland.
 Families must be central to future policy development in the United Nations and in other major world agencies that chart the course of world economic and social progress.
 The completion of the International Year of the Family is only the start of a process, which should lead to a framework within which families will be cherished, and their central contribution to the well-being of society acknowledged and supported.
 The United Nations must instil new urgency in the development of family-friendly policies.
 The United Nations, its specialized agencies and national Governments must implement measures to promote economic development so as to ensure that families benefit from the new prosperity.
 We also need proper support for families with disabled members as those members strive to live and work independently in our society.
 We must come forward with policies that are truly family-friendly.
 I should like to conclude by sharing with the Assembly a quotation that I came across recently, which captures the essence of what we are trying to achieve at international level.
 I believe very strongly that it is time we took a very determined position internationally in relation to people with disabilities by giving them the full involvement in society that they so richly deserve.
 We have the technologies and the knowledge.
 We must also have the will to ensure that these people are included in the front line of policies.
 "If you have come to help me, then you can go back home.
 Those words were uttered at a conference of people with disabilities. They contain a great lesson for all of us.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on Mr. Gudmundur Arni Stefsson, Minister of Social Affairs of Iceland, who will speak on behalf of the Nordic countries.
 Recognition and acceptance of the variety in family structures in different socio-political and cultural systems is one of the main goals of the United Nations International Year of the Family.
 In the Nordic countries, the Year of the Family has inspired considerable debate on the condition of families in modern societies.
 In those countries the family is perceived as a resource that is important both to individuals and to society.
 It is the basic unit for social integration and social reproduction.
 Consequently, much attention has been devoted to assessing the impact of social and economic developments in our societies on family life and on the measures to be taken to prevent the social exclusion of vulnerable families and their individual members.
 These policies, which are well integrated into our general welfare systems, emphasize the protection of children and gender equality.
 In times of economic recession it is particularly important, if we are to prevent social exclusion, to pay attention to the vulnerability of children and parents who lack support from local social networks.
 Society must be able to support families in distress.
 Tragic instances have demonstrated that an efficiently functioning network of social services is necessary.
 More recently, changing lifestyles and developments in the labour market have led to a number of reforms.
 The daily experiences of women and their efforts to reconcile family and work constitute a strong argument for the introduction of special incentives to share parental responsibilities, both in the labour market and in the family.
 While paying attention to the relevant experiences of women, we have become increasingly aware of the needs of children.
 The everyday experiences of children have prompted efforts to enhance measures for preventing their early social exclusion.
 Our most urgent concerns are to take measures to support parents in reconciling work and family life in a fruitful way and to provide supplementary services and networks for social and educational support, both for parents and children, in local settings.
 A tight daily schedule is a reality for many families with children.
 This benefits the working family members, the employers and the whole family and thus society in general.
 Making the working hours of parents of small or disabled children shorter and more flexible is one solution promoted by the Nordic countries.
 However, other alternative work arrangements should be available to parents.
 In reconciling family life and work life it is important that society offer support in the form of sufficient day-care services.
 Equality between family members and full enjoyment of human rights is a basic principle in the Nordic countries.
 This applies not least to children.
 Although problems that concern children cannot be solved simply through legislation, legislation does provide the basis for improving the status of the child.
 The laws in our countries include, among other things, provisions regarding the responsibility of parents in caring for their children.
 In this way, parental authority is exercised within the confines of the law.
 The protection of family members against domestic violence, particularly women and children, must be guaranteed by law.
 Yet legislation cannot stand on its own.
 It is therefore necessary to discuss domestic violence openly in order to influence general attitudes.
 Far-reaching economic and social change calls for revitalized and innovative family policies.
 The United Nations is an invaluable forum for this learning process.
 The United Nations also plays a central role in supporting programmes related to families.
 Particularly in countries which cannot afford a comprehensive social safety-net, the role of the family still remains crucial.
 The International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo made headway in many sectors critical to the family.
 The World Summit on Social Development in Copenhagen and the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing next year will give us an opportunity to address a wide range of issues which are closely related to the well-being of the family.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on Her Excellency Senator Rosemary Crowley, Minister for Family Services of Australia.
 Senator Crowley (Australia): It gives me very great pleasure to speak about Australia's contribution to the International Year of the Family.
 The United Nations wanted Governments and non-governmental organizations to recognize that their decisions and actions influence how families grow and how well they function as nurturers and providers.
 What the Australian Government aimed for, and what I believe it largely achieved, is a new level of commitment to Government policies and programs which are truly family-friendly.
 For the most part, they are thriving and making an enormous contribution to society.
 The country was home to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples thousands of years before white settlement.
 Within the cultures of these peoples, the family, particularly the extended family, plays a significant role.
 Today's Australian population of 17,000,000 includes people from over 130 ethnic backgrounds and over 220 nationalities.
 Nearly a quarter of our population was born overseas or has a parent who was born overseas.
 Celebration of the family has an important positive dimension.
 It helps to remind all of us - including Governments, employers, unions, and community organizations - of the central place in our culture of the family and the need to ensure that our policies and practices nurture, develop and protect the family.
 But celebration is not enough.
 A large part of this year has been spent listening closely to what our community has to say about families - about the challenges they are facing, and the ways Governments can best assist them.
 The Council produced a document called "The Heart of the Matter", which is a window on Australian families in 1994.
 It served as the basis for community consultation.
 The Australian community has responded enthusiastically.
 There were 70 days of consultation covering all parts of Australia, from the dusty outback to our urban centres, and the Council received over 500 submissions.
 The Australian Government's response to that report and to the Year will be the Australian Government Agenda for Families, a coherent and comprehensive statement of policy and programmes for families into the future.
 It will address all aspects of national Government activity that relate to families and the impact of all Government policies on families.
 Over the past decade, the Australian Government has implemented a broad range of policies to benefit Australian families.
 A nation's fundamental economic policies and infrastructure also have a crucial impact on the well-being of families.
 At that broad level, the Australian Government has achieved much in the past decade to provide families with opportunities to participate equally in the life of the country.
 We have implemented a number of programmes to assist women and enacted legislation to outlaw discrimination.
 The Government recognizes that most women in their adult lives will spend some time at home, particularly when their children are young, and some time in the paid work force.
 In this International Year of the Family, we have introduced new payments that support the choice of women and their families.
 Family income support - especially for those on low incomes who are caring for children - has been a major focus of the Australian Government since it was elected in 1983.
 The Government has introduced targeted payments to help those on very low incomes, whether or not they are in the work force, via the Family Allowance Supplement.
 We have attempted to give the support directly to the carer - usually the mother - and to maximize incentives for work force participation.
 The Government is currently conducting a major review of all family income payments to assess how they might be improved and made more accessible.
 Family law governing family formation and dissolution is also being systematically reviewed.
 The Australian Government is introducing major changes to our family laws this year.
 The changes will ease the painful process of dissolution of marriage and raise the status of children.
 Children will no longer be viewed as objects for custody but, rather, as people who deserve responsible parenting.
 These steps complement the recent establishment of the Child Support Agency.
 Each month the Child Support Agency passes on income support to 300,000 children.
 Regrettably the family is not always a safe and secure haven.
 These include: a national system of supported accommodation for women and families; a national clearing-house for research on violence against women and children; a national community domestic violence education programme to stop violence against women; and a national strategy to prevent child abuse and neglect.
 The Australian Government also supports a comprehensive range of family and parental counselling programmes.
 During the International Year of the Family the Government moved to further improve the pre-marriage counselling skills of civil celebrants so that the excellent programmes offered by the churches were matched for those married by civil ceremony.
 A particular priority has been to support community housing that maximizes tenants' control over their housing.
 The Government is also aware of the stress that poor health can put on families and it has put in place a universal health insurance scheme - Medicare - which guarantees access to high-quality health care for the whole population.
 There are also special health programmes targeted at the special health needs of indigenous Australians.
 Australia has not been spared the consequences of the recent world recession.
 The Government recognizes that sufficient jobs and a stable economy are crucial to family cohesion and well-being.
 To this end, it has extended significantly its employment and training programmes.
 This supplements the education programme for our children, which has seen the proportion who reach the final year of high school increase from under 40 per cent to more than double what it was over the last decade.
 In 1990 Australia ratified International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention 156 to strengthen its commitment to bridging the gap between families and work.
 One of the most significant contributions of the Government to family well-being, and to helping families combine paid work with parenting responsibilities, is the expansion of the child-care programme.
 Since 1983 the number of child-care places supported by the national Government has increased fivefold.
 And to ensure that parents can be confident in the quality of care their children are receiving we have instituted a national accreditation system.
 In the industrial sphere laws are being reviewed to help give further effect to ILO Convention 156.
 The Government has already legislated for a 12-month entitlement to parental leave to be available to all workers and has also legislated expressly to ensure that discrimination on the grounds of family responsibilities is unlawful.
 The Government's response to the needs of our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples is also central to our efforts to help create a mature, tolerant and fair society.
 Aboriginal peoples and families have historically been among the least advantaged in our community.
 Through legislation and through funded programmes we will continue to help this sector of our community to help themselves, and through legislation and funding we will also assist Aboriginal communities to acquire ownership and control of their traditional land in order to help keep communities and families together.
 Australia's initiatives for the International Year of the Family are an important part of the social justice agenda we have pursued for over 10 years now.
 The Australian Government Agenda for Families will build on these initiatives, extend them and, in particular, place the family at the centre of Government policy.
 By international standards Austria maintains a leading role with regard to family allowances and other supportive measures for the family.
 As a priority issue of Austria's social policy, family policy has been dealt with in a separate "Ministry of Family Affairs" since 1984.
 Our efforts have to be continued, increased and improved.
 New initiatives have to be launched.
 To achieve maximum public awareness and political impact, the National Committee was given a high status.
 At the same time, the National Committee was asked to seek the integration and participation of non-governmental organizations and family initiatives at the grass-roots level.
 The National Committee therefore comprises several levels: the political level, with representatives of the Federal Government and local governments, the cities and communities; the interest groups of employers and employees; and the operational level, represented by the liaison officers of the non-governmental organizations.
 The National Committee installed 15 working groups dealing with 15 priority areas of Austrian family policy.
 Around 700 experts, scientists, politicians, civil servants, members of family organizations and trade unions devoted their experience, expertise and a lot of time to the working groups.
 This effort initiated the broadest ever discussion process on family policy in Austria.
 Apart from the concrete results of the working groups, which will have a strong impact on family policy in Austria at large, the cooperation of individuals of different political and professional backgrounds and experience created a strong integrative effect.
 The debate in the working groups of the National Committee emphasized constructive cooperation and finding solution instead of pursuing political aims.
 This integrative effect of the machinery for the International Year of the Family can be seen as a great success, as it will have a positive influence on the climate for family policy in Austria in the years ahead.
 It is already evident at this stage that the working groups were able to reveal "blank spots" in Austria's family policy.
 In addition to the conceptual work, the working groups organized, in cooperation with the Federal Ministry of Family Affairs, a series of conferences and workshops on specific topics, the results of which not only enriched the work of the working groups, but also enhanced public awareness.
 In order to involve the local level, the Federal Ministry of Family Affairs initiated a competition for projects and ideas which contribute to higher quality of life of the family or to the improvement of the family's problem-solving capacity.
 Family organizations organized major events all over Austria, with more than 50,000 families participating.
 On the International Day of the Family, on 15 May, some 300 family-related events took place in cities and smaller villages.
 In order to raise public awareness of these events, the Federal Minister for Family Affairs launched an award for journalists focusing on family issues in their work.
 Students aged 14 to 18 received a brochure to motivate them to reflect on their families and their role within the family.
 Mr. Pallais (Nicaragua), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 A first evaluation of the Year's observance at the national level proves that it was possible to achieve a higher awareness of family issues by the public and to enhance the status of family policy at the governmental level.
 Therefore, we are now confronted with the challenge of making use of the benefits achieved in 1994 to promote a long-term process in which family matters can be pursued as priority policy issues.
 Attaining this objective will require the support of the following:
 First, on the basis of the results achieved by the working groups, a long-term family programme is being elaborated; after endorsement by the Austrian Government, it should form a basis of Austria's family policy at the transition to the next millennium.
 Secondly, as an accompanying measure, an Institute of Family Research has recently been established, with the task of carrying out relevant research in support of the decision-making process in the field of family policy.
 Thirdly, it is intended to maintain the National Committee on a permanent basis as a national coordinating body on family issues.
 Fourthly, involvement and participation at the local level has to be further strengthened.
 Depending on the outcome, holding this event on a yearly basis is being considered.
 Sixthly, cooperation with the media will be further developed.
 Television commercials are in production which aim at increased public awareness of the important role of the family as a social network and of the necessity of appropriate support for the family through society.
 Mrs. Verh\x{e166}sdonk (Germany): I have the honour to address the item on the International Conference on Families on behalf of the European Union.
 The inventory of national action prepared by the secretariat of the International Year of the Family lists an impressive number of events organized at the local and national levels to achieve the goals of the Year.
 Furthermore, the International Year of the Family has initiated important research activities concerning family problems.
 Everywhere, these activities have stimulated efforts at all levels, both in the public and in the private spheres, to respond to problems affecting, and affected by, the situation of families.
 This expresses the diversity of individual preferences as well as of societal conditions.
 The varying forms of families in different societies notwithstanding, the International Year of the Family, in our view, declared that the family continues to be the basic unit of society and that therefore the family should be accorded the widest possible protection and assistance.
 Families play an important role in the socialization, education and protection of children and in the intergenerational transmission of culture and values of social conduct, thus deeply influencing the social behaviour of each individual.
 Hence, families and their individual members should be afforded the necessary protection.
 There were very interesting discussions on the issues of the International Year of the Family at the series of regional preparatory meetings and at the World Forum of non-governmental organizations, held in Malta.
 The United Nations Europe and North America Preparatory Meeting for the International Year of the Family, held last year in Valletta, Malta, adopted the Valletta Declaration on the principles, objectives and policy considerations of the International Year of the Family.
 We consider a number of the recommendations in that Declaration to be of particular importance even beyond the context of the Year.
 The European Union attaches great importance to finding flexible and innovative arrangements and to implementing effectively existing laws and regulations governing employment, in order to assist workers to reconcile family life and responsibilities on the one hand and gainful employment on the other.
 This was one of the issues discussed by European Ministers responsible for family affairs at their informal meeting on 15 September 1994 in Berlin.
 In addition to the 1992 recommendation on child care the European Union is currently considering measures to improve possibilities for parental leave and part-time work.
 Furthermore, a family and work network consisting of 12 independent expert consultants has been set up to consider these matters further and to initiate action in the public and private sector.
 Furthermore, the Declaration points out that efforts to facilitate the reconciliation of family responsibilities and gainful employment have to build on the recognition that family functions and responsibilities must be equally shared between men and women.
 The European Union hopes that the fourth World Conference on Women will make concrete proposals in this regard.
 Appropriate consideration should be given to assisting parents and caregivers and families with special needs, including those having insufficient levels of resources or having members with disabilities or elderly persons to care for.
 In addition, all measures should reflect an understanding of the different ways in which the needs and situation of families and their members change over the life cycle.
 Another element which we find particularly important is the call for all States to take the necessary measures to prevent all forms of violence and abuse within families.
 Family violence is one of the most insidious forms of violence, particularly against women and children.
 It is committed in all societies.
 States have to ensure that laws against family violence and abuse, rape, sexual assault and other forms of gender-based violence protect the integrity and dignity of women and children.
 To this end, we urge all Governments that have not yet done so to ratify and implement fully the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women.
 But whatever form it takes in a given country and whatever the religious and ethical values, cultural backgrounds and philosophical convictions of its people, the European Union believes that relations within the family must be based on respect for the rights and dignity of each of its members.
 However, this Year has to be seen as an important event within a continuing process.
 Three major conferences in the next two years, namely the World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World Conference on Women and the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), will address issues which are of great concern also for families.
 Mr. Bella (Slovakia): The Slovak Republic has adopted a complex approach to the International Year of the Family, on both governmental and non-governmental levels.
 A particular contribution of the Slovak Government to the International Year of the Family was the launching of a new support programme targeting young families.
 This coincided with the official visit to Slovakia, on 1 June 1994, of the United Nations Coordinator for the International Year of the Family, Mr. Henryk Sakolski, who was received by the President, the Prime Minister and other high-ranking officials.
 During 1994, the Slovak National Council adopted several important bills related to the social and economic welfare of families.
 Thus, the Centre became a focal point not only for national, but also for international activities.
 The Centre coordinates a series of research activities at the national and international levels with the aim of assessing the most urgent needs of, and problems related to, the family.
 As an example, let me mention the international comparative research project: "Possibilities and limits of the family in present-day Europe", or the subregional project (Bratislava - Szeged - Zagreb) on family educational environment.
 The International Centre for Family Studies has already organized several conferences and workshops with international participation such as, for example: "Ethics in the family and in society", "Families with special problems", "Families in new socio-economic conditions" and "The problems of small countries and their future".
 The Interregional Meeting of the National Focal Points/Coordinators for IYF, to be held in Bratislava in February 1995, will be the culmination of our activities within the framework of the International Year of the Family.
 The International Year of the Family was also an opportunity for a whole range of non-governmental organizations to address family issues through their activities in the educational, cultural, humanitarian, health, population and other fields.
 The Slovak Catholic Charity opened a new Centre for Family and Education in Bratislava.
 Abundant cultural events, such as a new cycle of family concerts and an exhibition entitled "Child in the Family", have taken place.
 The International Centre of Family Studies has been developing its activities in the challenging environment of the changing socio-economic situation of most families in the region against the background of the ongoing transition and reform process.
 Currently, the Slovak Government is putting the final touches to the corresponding draft agreement proposed by the United Nations IYF Coordinator.
 We would highly appreciate friendly support for the affiliation of the International Centre of Family Studies in the very near future.
 The Centre, having a very advantageous location in close geographical proximity to the United Nations Office in Vienna, could become a useful basis for the future follow-up activities of the International Year for the Family in the region.
 To this important programme one should naturally add the Conference on Population and Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women, two topics to which the General Assembly regularly draws the attention of the international community.
 We all realize the amount of work that these global events involve for Member States and the Organization, and yet everyone buckled down to this common task with vigour and determination.
 Today we are concentrating on the International Year of the Family, but we must place it in the context of our other endeavours.
 France viewed this Year as a special time to reflect on the family and policies for the family, taking two facts into account.
 Young people place the family at the head of their values.
 Family ties are what enable them to face more calmly a future that often seems to them uncertain and sometimes even frightening.
 There are four main reasons for that.
 First, the role of the family is acknowledged.
 Article 16(3) of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights states:
 "The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State."
 All French people recognize the validity of this formula, because for them the family has many roles.
 The family is therefore the guarantor of our shared future.
 Secondly, individual rights are recognized.
 No one can doubt that France is committed to the inalienable rights of each individual and that support for families, whatever form that support takes, is provided solely at their option and with respect for the individual rights of each member.
 Thirdly, the need for national solidarity is accepted.
 Family policies reflect a concern for justice and social equilibrium.
 The solidarity effort is justified by the collective dimension of the family as an institution which is the origin of the renewal of every society.
 While it is impossible to define "the family", any family, its foundation has always been a man and a woman determined to face the future together and hoping to create life.
 Fourthly, the role of the State is recognized.
 Partnership and dialogue between the authorities and the family is a longstanding French tradition, which makes it possible to carry out regularly, at both the provincial and national levels, an in-depth assessment of successes, to analyse shortcomings, examine new approaches and consider implementation of the resulting policies.
 In fact, the French Government is jointly pursuing all three objectives within the framework of a comprehensive policy taking account of the aspirations and needs of families of all kinds, because families are at the heart of most public policies.
 The International Year of the Family has been an important time for France.
 First, as soon as his Government took office in 1993, The Prime Minister, Mr. Edouard Balladur, started work on a five-year law in support of the family, and it was adopted on 25 July 1994.
 The main provisions of the law, which improves even further our family support measures are:
 It now goes into effect as of the second child and can be paid if part-time work is involved.
 From now on, all wage-earners will be guaranteed their job back - or an equivalent job - when parental leave comes to an end.
 Improving the right to leave for family reasons;
 New measures to support families with young adults to look after or where there have been multiple births or adoption;
 It will be widely distributed in France and will also be sent to our foreign counterparts and to the Coordinator of the International Year in Vienna.
 In its resolution 47/237 the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit next year specific proposals on the follow-up for the year.
 An interregional meeting, to be held in Bratislava from 4 to 7 February 1995, will deal with this question.
 I have stressed the importance and the interrelationship of our various activities.
 The World Summit for Social Development and the Beijing Conference will undoubtedly in their turn contribute substantively to our undertaking.
 It must respect the following simple principles: recognition of the role of the family; respect for individual rights, including the rights of women; free choice of family lifestyles; support for and protection of the family by society and the State; and partnership with families and their representatives.
 Tolerance is a noble, vital concept when applied to the family, because it belongs above all in the private domain.
 While the authorities must show judgement, because families - let us be honest - can also be places of oppression and violence, we must accept differences when they accord with the major principles underlying the legitimacy of our Organization.
 Because it is in the family that we place our hopes in the struggle against the rise of individualism, which threatens our societies, we must all make sure that we protect our families.
 While the follow-up to the Year must naturally be carried out first - and principally - at the national level, our Organization can help by proposing a joint consideration of principles, objectives and methods.
 France is resolved to take part in this future work, as it should enable all societies to enter the twenty-first century with a more hopeful outlook.
 Mr. Razali (Malaysia): The Malaysian delegation welcomes the declaration of 1994, in recognition of the critical role of the family, as the International Year of the Family.
 Since 1990 the Malaysian Government has declared 11 November each year Malaysian National Family Day.
 In order to observe this important occasion, the Malaysian Government has allocated a budget of about $1 million to finance relevant activities.
 The activities themselves combine activities of Malaysian National Family Day and those suggested by the United Nations for the International Year of the Family.
 The marginalization of the family institution is a serious problem requiring the attention of all societies, in developed as well as developing countries.
 The pressures exerted on the family are tremendous.
 The social problems of development, poverty, joblessness and crime, as well as the competing and contradictory pressures that bear down on the individual and the family unit, have contributed to the impairment of the ability of the family institution to perform its functions.
 We should collectively recognize and address these problems.
 While nowadays one may stress the rights and ability of the individual, my delegation believes that it would be wrong to do so at the cost of the attrition of the family as an entity.
 The individual and the family actually reinforce each other: individual rights complement consensual needs.
 We see the breakdown of this premise as a contributory factor leading towards serious polarization and challenges to societies, as can be seen in both developing and developed countries.
 The threat posed by criminal activities to any society should not be downplayed or underestimated.
 The family is the building block of society.
 The role of the family in ensuring that human beings will enjoy a productive life in a secure and safe environment, in harmony with nature, is paramount.
 For us in Malaysia, as in other places, the family is at the heart of an extended human relationship that must survive the process of our development and evolution and not be its casualty.
 Many societies long ago lost the ability to recognize and further nurture the family as the confluence of reconciliation, healing and motivation.
 We regret that this has come about and that in some societies there is a sense of being adrift.
 The experience that one goes through in everyday family life will shape one's character, attitude, demeanour, moral persuasion and various other human traits that ultimately condition the way one interacts with the social and physical environment.
 The vital functions of the family include the upbringing of the young, through both formal and informal education.
 In fact, world-wide, Governments are expected to face a serious problem pertaining to the care of the elderly, especially the poor, the frail and the destitute.
 This ancient family role must be preserved and promoted.
 This will contribute to the strengthening of the family as an institution.
 Issues relating to family violence, child abuse, child care, care of the disabled and the elderly, education, health care, the care of orphans, housing and basic amenities are closely linked to the integrity of the family institution, and they need to be addressed in that context.
 These problems often have severe negative repercussions on families.
 Governments therefore have a moral obligation and a social responsibility to intervene and ensure that the basic necessities remain within the reach of ordinary people.
 In many societies women have been the unacknowledged pillars of the family.
 Emotionally and physically, they provide succour and sustenance to the family, and in many cases they are the breadwinners as well.
 Society has to come to grips with the problems of women by devising institutional means to alleviate their burden, which will consequently enhance the integrity of the family.
 The hardship and, indeed, the misery of these women must be acknowledged and alleviated through the provision of legal and financial support so that these families will continue to survive.
 An essential feature of support for women must have, as its central focus, education.
 The education of women is one way to enhance their status to ensure that they can react to changing socio-economic situations and be aware of the full extent of their rights and role within society.
 The international community will have the opportunity to address again the issue of strengthening the family institution at the forthcoming World Summit for Social Development.
 The issues which form the core interest of the Summit - namely, poverty, employment and social integration - are directly related to the important role and function of the family.
 Poverty and unemployment often cripple the ability of families in producing healthy, balanced individuals.
 The United Nations, through such agencies as the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations Development Programme, has been instrumental in helping developing countries to provide essential services to the people, thereby indirectly supporting the family structure.
 These agencies must continue to do so.
 Donor countries should in fact increase their contributions to fund these agencies, rather than reducing their contributions as current trends would seem to indicate.
 My delegation also believes that non-governmental organizations have a major role to play in alleviating the pressures on families.
 Together with Governments and the local people, non-governmental organizations can play an important role in maintaining and, where possible, strengthening the role of families.
 This is particularly important for non-governmental organizations from the South, which must work together with Governments to improve the lot of the people.
 In conclusion, as mankind proceeds inexorably to improve its standard and quality of life, it goes without saying that the process must ensure the integrity and relevance of the family.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I now call on The Honourable Mr. Antonio Guidi, Minister for the Family and Social Solidarity of Italy.
 Mr. Guidi (Italy) (spoke in Italian; English text furnished by the delegation): Let me begin by thanking the United Nations and the Coordinator of the International Year of the Family, Mr. Henryk Sakolski for organizing this International Conference on the Family.
 While fully supporting the statement made by my German colleague on behalf of the European Union, I should like to add my country's reflections on the crucial issue of the family.
 Anyone who has had prolonged professional contact with disability is well-acquainted with the phenomenon of those who either isolate themselves or become stubborn.
 Unfortunately, all too few people have made this intuition their own over the years.
 I believe that the United Nations showed the same awareness and foresight in proclaiming 1994 the International Year of the Family.
 This is the same year as the Cairo Conference on Population and Development and the preparations for next year's Beijing Conference on Women.
 In both Conferences, the central role of the family emerges as a reality at the crossroads of all the problems of modern society.
 The Cairo Conference reaffirmed the family as the natural and fundamental nucleus of society, with the right to be protected by society and the State, as postulated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 It then showed the world how the family - in the many forms reflecting the various social, cultural and political systems in which it exists and develops - is currently going through a period of serious moral and material hardship.
 And the first people to be penalized by this hardship are children, the elderly and women, which can be three extremely vulnerable categories in the current social context.
 The child, as the United Nations Children's Fund often points out, is the subject most affected by society's shortcomings.
 In poor societies, imbalances in demographics and resources are created that generate severe hardships affecting a child's expectations of life, such as education, health and even dreams.
 It is my hope, and the social struggles of my country are testimony to the fact, that in planning and making laws on children, we operate no longer from the adult's perspective but from the minor's.
 I ask this Assembly to reflect on the conditions of children who live in war zones.
 In the past 10 years, 1.5 million children have lost their lives in armed conflicts; 4 million have remained disabled; 5 million are refugees; and 12 million have been uprooted from their home communities.
 This list of facts shows us the dimensions of a phenomenon that I consider both terrifying and unworthy of a civil humanity, a humanity that should be a "parent", as the Pope said on the International Day of Families, quoting Genesis:
 In this union they transmit life to new human beings: they become parents.
 In this way they take part in the creative power."
 I hope that in the current year Governments that have not yet signed the Declaration will do so, thereby allowing for its full application.
 This is a war that consists of daily shortages and continuous abuses of power, and it is far from over.
 It too requires the drafting of an international treaty: How much is the life of a child worth?
 But women, whom the Egyptian President Mubarak called "the cornerstone of our society", represent the second vulnerable element within the family.
 Today, in many countries and situations, the roles within the family and the society are too rigid.
 The Government Commission for Equal Opportunity established in Italy is working from this perspective.
 I hope that the participants in the upcoming Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing can reach a general consensus on these principles and draft precise recommendations on the condition of women.
 What do we do for the elderly? I am referring to all those who, having reached what their society considers an advanced age, are unjustly relegated to the sidelines.
 The main problems regarding the elderly can be summarized under four headings: quality of life, health services, guarantee of employment for as long as the individual can or wishes to work, and integration into the family.
 Taking care of the elderly is a duty towards those who in the recent past bore the weight of our society on their shoulders.
 But it also and specifically meets the challenge of civility.
 Thus, in part through the creation of a system of social support, we must restore the elderly to a central position within the family framework.
 This would enrich young people by teaching them to appreciate those who by their example, dignity, experience and culture can provide certainty in the present and guidance in the future.
 And if an elderly person has no family, or has a family that cannot maintain him or her within its nucleus, the State must shoulder the responsibility for the creation of small structures that interact with the territory and the population.
 This culminated in 1993 with fewer births than deaths.
 There are also reasons that are not material, such as little faith in the future, lack of control over one's immediate situation, and the current trend of young couples' regarding a child as a curb on their freedom.
 One phenomenon of great current interest is the increasing number of families with one parent and one child.
 This particular reality is very difficult for both the adult, who is often exposed and alone, and the child, who is the focus of all the adult's affection.
 The child cannot share this affection with other children in a society that tends to separate individuals, or with brothers and sisters, or with the other parent.
 Allow me to refer to what I regard as the ideal family, even it is difficult to put together.
 It can respond to the many needs of a growing child through the daily commitment of the couple and the precious support of the elderly - I do not wish to be nostalgic but to look towards a possible future.
 This family must treat, prevent, and settle social hardships - a trustee of the highly delicate task of educating minors and protecting the elderly and the disabled.
 Although this has allowed the less severely disabled to be integrated into society and to express their potential, it has not given everyone the same opportunity.
 They are not victims of unjust regimes or of wars.
 Part of the reason I am here today is to ask Governments to make it a priority to act on behalf of these people and at the same time to recognize them as a social resource of humanity.
 The problem of reuniting the families of immigrants leads inevitably to what emerged in Cairo as one of the main problems facing humanity in the near future, namely, immigration.
 The solution to this problem must be sought in a transnational framework, through a gradual rebalancing of individual national economies and in full respect for the social and cultural independence of populations.
 The foreigner must be treated as a friend and, as such, as a possible resource for the host country.
 Until this happens, one of the problems posed by immigration will be the reuniting of families, which is a fair expectation and a right for the millions of emigrants who honestly pursue the dream of bettering their conditions of life by working in a foreign land.
 In Italy we have adopted measures to create a system of rights and duties that respect human dignity.
 This can be done in part through the utilization of social services, the acquisition of civil rights and the possibility of reuniting their families.
 Going back to what I said in Cairo, I propose the inclusion of immigration-related issues in the agenda of the next meeting of the G-7, in Canada.
 It is my conviction that volunteerism should be understood as a strong, founding value of a civil and unselfish society.
 It should be praised as a model for overcoming hardship in a population otherwise lacking in ideological points of reference.
 Volunteerism is also a response to shortcomings in the public sector and plays a role, for example, in the creation of very important centres for drug addicts, the handicapped and abandoned children.
 Volunteerism is true treasure, and it will constitute one of the fundamental values of the year 2000.
 I feel great sadness when I realize that people today no longer dream the impossible dream.
 But I am glad that they seek instead a justice with human dimensions, an end to violence and the fulfilment of primary needs - all rights that should be concrete, natural and universal.
 Through a series of initiatives like those for the Year of the Family, which is officially concluding today, that Year will prompt a series of reflections by Governments and mankind on the true values on which to base the future development of our society and individual life.
 The first of these is solidarity.
 My hope as Italy's Minister for the Family is that in the near future, through solidarity, old and new self-interests and ethnic, social and religious hatred can be overcome to achieve that superior good to which we aspire, namely, peace.
 Whoever looks at reality without truly seeing it cannot understand.
 No later than tomorrow - or even today - we must enter into a mode of communication in which we will all have equal dignity of voice, tone and role.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I now call on Mr. Win Mra, Permanent Representative of Myanmar.
 Mr. Mra (Myanmar): With its adoption of resolution 44/82 of 8 December 1989, the General Assembly proclaimed 1994 as the International Year of the Family.
 The resolution reaffirmed the importance of the family as the most basic unit of society.
 It also reawakened the international community to the role of the family in contemporary society and to the challenges it faces as a result of political, economic and social changes.
 This is the most fitting occasion to examine the challenges brought about by these changes and to formulate appropriate strategies.
 We can say with a sense of satisfaction that the preparatory process has succeeded in promoting the objectives of the Year and has resulted in crystallization of the substantive concerns regarding families.
 Consequently, we find ourselves today poised to embark on follow-up activities.
 One of the principles underlying the International Year of the Family is the need to undertake the activities of the Year at all levels - local, national, regional and international, with the primary focus at the local and national levels.
 Only with sustained effort at these two levels can the family regain its pivotal role in ensuring the well-being of society.
 Today is the most opportune time to take stock of activities at the national level.
 In the Union of Myanmar many activities were undertaken during the preparatory stage - activities such as organizing child-development centres; holding contests for children and giving prizes to the winners; and arranging ceremonies for cash donations towards observance of the International Day of Families.
 Arrangements to coordinate departments' observance of the International Day of the Family were made in April 1994.
 Non-governmental organizations were invited to take part, in accordance with the objectives of the International Year of the Family.
 Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 47/237, the International Day of Families was observed in Myanmar on 15 May 1994 under the auspices of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement.
 A special ceremony was held to observe the Day, at which the Minister for Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement gave an account of the principles and objectives of the International Year of the Family.
 A commemorative theme song composed for the Year was also broadcast by Myanmar television on 15 May 1994.
 In addition, the predominant religion, culture and traditions of the land require that the family remain a cohesive unit for the development of the children and for their nurturing through proper upbringing.
 While caring for its other dependants, the family is mainly responsible for the growth and development of its most vulnerable members - infants and children.
 The Myanmar family structure is conducive to this role.
 Children are the object and focus of parental and grandparental love.
 By tradition and culture, as well as by law, the rights of the child are conscientiously and scrupulously respected.
 Myanmar has always had legislation to protect children - for example, the Young Offenders Act 1930 and the Children Act 1955.
 As a State party, Myanmar has accepted a formal obligation to recognize and protect the broad range of rights provided for in the Convention.
 Under the new legislation, a child in the custody of a cruel or wicked parent or guardian is defined as being in need of protection and care, and the State is required to intervene to protect the rights of such a child.
 The Myanmar Government's multifaceted measures to ensure the nation's development have resulted in an expansion of social services.
 This is the outcome of innovative social policies that address the needs of families.
 These social services are being provided, not only by the Government, but also by non-governmental organizations.
 The roles and functions of the family have changed, principally as a result of economic modernization and of moral degradation and its concomitant circumstances.
 How to safeguard this basic character against the onslaught of contemporary pressures is the challenge with which the international community is now confronted.
 In developing countries, where formal social security systems are inadequate - indeed, in some cases such systems do not exist - the family and the community are the two entities that can provide individual social security.
 It is therefore important for the developing countries to maintain and strengthen the existing family structures and to promote the community spirit until such time as the State can afford an adequate and sustainable social security system.
 For their part, the developing countries should have as components of their social policies plans and programmes to uphold the traditional values that underpin the cohesiveness of the family.
 Any future strategy must encourage the instillation of these time-tested values.
 Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 It should constitute an important starting-point in a long-term process.
 My delegation fully supports the Secretary-General's plans to have appropriate follow-up strategies ready for timely submission to the fiftieth session of the General Assembly.
 The celebration of the International Year of the Family does credit to the United Nations, in particular if we assess the impact the Year has had on the international community, especially at the region, national and local levels.
 As we near the year 2000, the family continues to be seen as the basic unit of society in light of the key functions it plays at the heart of inter-generational solidarity, and as the emotional, economic and material support its members need for their proper growth and development.
 The family as an entity cannot be said a priori to be "finished" in a more or less defined way, nor do its functions appear to have been established once and for all.
 On the contrary, it is seen as a constantly evolving, multifaceted and dynamic reality, a producer of changes but also affected by those changes.
 It is a social framework whose role and functions cannot be seen as exclusively private units, but rather as public units in constant interaction with demographic, cultural, political, legal and economic phenomena.
 From sociological data, we can conclude that the institution of the family plays a central role in the renewed Spanish society at the end of this century.
 Family life has received very high marks in surveys on well-being.
 What is most interesting is the fact that these well-being indicators are independent of other social variables such as schooling, income and social class.
 Undoubtedly the family is the first educational environment in which an active and prolonged process of socialization, learning and transfer of culture takes place.
 Within the family, one can begin to promote true equality of opportunity for girls and boys to have access to culture, knowledge and democratic values.
 The society and the State must provide the necessary environment and resources for families to exercise this basic responsibility, while themselves fulfilling their own responsibilities by ensuring universal, accessible, quality education and thus promoting equal access to opportunities.
 This, moreover, involves educational policies aimed at ensuring the effective participation of families, children and teenagers in the educational community.
 Similar measures are also required for the protection and promotion of mothers in such areas as labour law and health policy, to make mother-child health services, family planning, and early detection and treatment for the disabled universally available and accessible.
 Therefore, meeting the new challenges of the modern family requires promoting all of its members through public policies which will facilitate, among other things, a balance between family and work life.
 Establishing individual needs and those of the family as a group in organizing daily family life will guarantee that families can function.
 It is the basis for sustaining a new social covenant in the private sector, a covenant between men and women, between children and adults, between the elders and the other members of the family - a family covenant.
 Experts, non-governmental organizations and political heads of ministries that have the most to do with family policies have appeared before that working group.
 The results of this work will be reflected in requests by the Congress to the Government.
 The Senate has requested the Government to establish an inter-ministerial working group to draft a report on the situation of one-parent families in Spain and draw up proposals to improve the most difficult social situations.
 Similarly, progress has been made in some autonomous and local administrations.
 Moreover, in connection with the celebration of the International Year of the Family, a National Committee has been set up in which experts, non-governmental organizations and representatives of the Central Administration, autonomous communities and local administrations are participating.
 As regards substantive commitments, in the light of the purposes and principles which the United Nations has proposed for the International Year of the Family, we have drafted a Plan of Action which includes the contributions of the members of the National Committee.
 This Plan establishes the goals of campaigns to promote communications, awareness and exchanges of information during the International Year of the Family which have been developed in Spain.
 It has been an opportunity for non-governmental organizations to be more visible in our societies and for Governments to take a more active interest in the needs and expectations of families.
 The activities connected with the International Year of the Family should be appropriately reflected in the activities of the United Nations, and should be in keeping with the important role families play in our societies.
 We firmly support the decision by the United Nations inter-agency meeting that the slogan of the celebration in 1995 of the International Day of Families should be: "Tolerance Begins in the Family".
 However, of equal importance is our resolve to make progress at the regional, national and local levels in improving the status and promoting the quality of life of the family in our societies.
 Ms. Kilgour Carr (Canada): Canada is proud to say that it has taken an active role in celebrating the International Year of the Family.
 In our country, international years have often been milestones in the development of public policy and social action.
 However, to achieve that impact they must belong to Canadian society as a whole - its governments, institutions and communities.
 After all, Canada is made up of millions of different families.
 All these factors underline the value of reaching out to enlist wide support for the International Year of the Family.
 Our international commitment has taken forms such as the decision to fund a staff person at the International Year of the Family secretariat in Vienna for a three-year period.
 A major component of the Secretariat's strategy has been participation in major family-related conferences, such as the one held in Victoria, British Columbia, on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
 They looked at the needs of children in situations of emergency, basic health and welfare needs, children and youth with disabilities, and a host of other issues.
 In addition to the federal government's work, individual provinces and territories have formed groups or assigned staff to promote International Year of the Family activities within their own jurisdictions.
 The federal government provided funds to establish this independent, non-governmental organization in 1992.
 It has a board of directors made up of 32 distinguished Canadians.
 Since its creation, it has been active in forming partnerships with other non-governmental organizations and business, labour and community organizations.
 The Committee developed The Work and Family Challenge Programme to make employers more aware of the realities of balancing work and family responsibilities.
 It commissioned a survey of public opinion on families and family life.
 It developed a learning and study guide about Canadian families that was distributed to all Canadian elementary school principals.
 We can say with confidence that Canadian non-governmental organizations have played an active role in promoting the International Year of the Family.
 Last week, in collaboration with the United Nations International Year of the Family secretariat, the Canada Committee for the International Year of the Family, in conjunction with three Canadian non-governmental organizations, hosted "Today's Families: A Bridge to the Future", the closing conference for the Year.
 In his keynote address to this conference, held in Montreal, the Prime Minister of Canada, the Right Honourable Jean Chrien, underlined the importance of strong families to society and the obligation Governments have to support them.
 One result of the Montreal conference is the non-governmental statement about follow-up to the important work that has been accomplished through the Year.
 That non-governmental document was presented here today.
 Some of the issues discussed in Montreal also form part of the agenda of the International Conference on Population and Development.
 Canada endorses the progressive recommendations that resulted from the Conference and supports the Programme of Action agreed to in Cairo.
 In particular, we believe that improving the conditions of women and empowering them with choices will help to build better families, better societies and a better world.
 In the same way, we look forward to the World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women, to take place in 1995.
 Canada believes that both conferences will benefit from the attention we have paid to the needs of families and all their members this year.
 One of the most tangible effects of an international year is its influence on public policy.
 On 26 July, the Minister of Health, the Honourable Diane Marleau, announced the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Programme.
 This Programme will help give the smallest, most vulnerable members of a family the healthiest start possible in life.
 On 5 October, the Federal Government released a discussion paper in which the Canadian people are asked to help set contemporary social security priorities.
 For more than 50 years Canadians have developed a large network of social programmes, and yet too many people find themselves without the help they need to adapt to a changing economy.
 The Government of Canada believes a government committed to stronger families must work to address these issues.
 It is committed to doing so.
 The impact of the International Year of the Family will be felt in years to come through these issues and decisions in both the private and the public sectors.
 Canadians have told us that families are important.
 They expect all parts of society to work together to support families. Canada is proudly taking on that challenge.
 Mrs. Leeds (United States of America): The United States strongly supports protecting and strengthening the family as a basic social and economic unit.
 The family provides the environment within which the next...................................... generation is born, sheltered, nourished and educated.
 Mothers and fathers must nourish the child with food and love, protect the child from harm, ensure that the child is cared for when ill, and provide the child's early education.
 The concern, therefore, is not only for children but for the capacity of parents to provide adequate care and stimulation for their children.
 Promoting the economic and social well-being of families, children and communities is the heart of the mission of the ACF.
 The ACF works also to develop supportive communities with a positive impact on the quality of life and development of people.
 The Extension System organized a national task force made up of Extension professionals and representatives from the private sector.
 This approach to development is based on the premise that successful development must put people first through reflecting and responding to the realities and dynamics of daily life, which are most keenly felt at the level of the family and household.
 Traditionally, development experts used gross national product statistics or numbers of targeted beneficiaries to measure the impact of their programmes.
 The result of this focus on macro-level statistics or individual interventions is that the family system, its role in society and its effect on individuals tend to be overlooked.
 Because there are many different family systems throughout the world, and even within countries, it is important to approach the design and implementation of programmes with an analysis of how intra-family relationships and gender roles influence the allocation of resources to individuals.
 Focusing on families also highlights the fact that most people operate as members of family systems, not as isolated individuals.
 The betterment strategies of many households depend on maximizing the productive use of family resources, often across intergenerational lines.
 It is within families that most individuals are nurtured, sheltered, educated and allocated resources.
 Health, housing, income, education and other social and economic factors are all interrelated, and it is within the family system that they come together.
 We believe that focusing attention at the level of the family lets us see the interrelated needs of people so that assistance both at home and abroad can respond to their needs and priorities, rather than reflecting primarily the "solutions" of development specialists.
 It means building on the strengths and the potential of families, respecting their strategies for self-improvement and the rights of all family members.
 Development is based on understanding how resources are allocated within the household, who controls the resources, who makes the decisions, and why.
 Today, many families are faced with stress as a result of poverty, disasters, disease, war or pandemics.
 Although families are resilient and have developed coping strategies when faced with adversity, many become so overwhelmed that they are no longer able to cope.
 The millions of children orphaned by AIDS or forced to work rather than go to school, or who are living or working on the street, are manifestations of stress on family systems.
 Often working in local communities, these organizations implicitly understand the fact that the needs of individuals are influenced by their family's resources, decisions and dynamics.
 For no matter what a family unit looks like today, the family remains the essential ingredient in shaping our later lives.
 All children need the love and support that only caring parents, caring adults can provide.
 As First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton said in recent remarks to a graduating university class,
 We need both within our families.
 Two major United Nations events will take place next year: the World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women.
 For now, before the International Year of the Family comes to a close, let us all take the time to show our own families how much we cherish them, and to remember the needs of families everywhere.
 The President (interpretation from French): I call next on Her Excellency Mrs. Josefina Bilbao, Minister of the National Women's Service of Chile.
 After chairing the national Commission for the Family established by former President Patrizio Aylwin to carry out an in-depth study of the family in Chile and to prepare extensive diagnosis of the subject, I was appointed by President Frei to head this Ministry.
 I am therefore in a position to say that for my Government the United Nations proclamation of the International Year of the Family was not merely timely but far-sighted, both for my country and for the entire international community.
 In only half a decade a new international order has arisen.
 But in this new international order there will be a cruel rise in the inequality of opportunities throughout the world.
 With the consolidation of societies that are freer, more advanced technologically, more responsible environmentally and more pluralistic culturally, contrasts persist that are unacceptable to the conscience of mankind.
 Poverty, unfulfilled basic human needs, unemployment and intolerance are problems that continue to affect all countries, but they are tragic in developing countries, and especially in the least advanced of them.
 In this context, the family stands out once again conspicuously as the basic unit of society - overwhelmed but also the source of meaningful change.
 It stands out as the natural structure for fostering the potentials of all its members, and as the irreplaceable agent for social-development policies.
 Chile welcomed the United Nations call to commemorate the International Year of the Family and wishes to share with the Assembly its pride at having done so with conviction and commitment.
 For we achieved the first of the goals also we had set ourselves: putting the family on our civic agenda.
 Studies carried out as part of the Year showed that family-related aspirations are a high priority among the majority in our country, and that there are many kinds of families facing many kinds of problems.
 The family is paramount for Chile because of our cultural identity, our historical memory and our traditions.
 Hence, we all know that to preserve the family is to be responsible for its development, for its changes, for its problems and difficulties and for its vast creative possibilities as an agent of the values that mobilize us as a nation.
 We know that in many countries macroeconomic structural-adjustment policies have exacerbated unemployment and all the other manifestations of poverty and violence.
 We also know that there has been an especially hard impact on women, owing to their position in the workforce and in the family.
 The reduction or elimination of social services has affected women's access to employment and have transferred the burden of providing those services to families - and within those families, to women.
 In that connection, I believe that the main changes in the family in recent decades relate directly to changes in the status of women in various societies; we must recognize that linkage in devising modern, democratic policies.
 Chile has successfully made the transition to democracy; our rate of economic growth has been some 6 per cent over the past decade.
 At the same time, our modernization has been imbalanced, and poverty persists.
 The Government of President Eduardo Frei has clearly defined its priority: we aspire to the eradication of extreme poverty by the end of the century.
 In order to do this, we need more democracy, improved economic growth and social policies that will provide equal opportunities for the most marginalized.
 Because of this conviction, we strongly value the contribution made by the various international conferences convened by the United Nations on the relevant issues.
 The International Year of the Family is a step towards the Fourth World Conference on Women; changes in individual sectors help to promote overall change.
 We have also made progress in legal reform.
 A few weeks ago, the first legal text defining and imposing sanctions on violence within the family was promulgated, and there has also been a reform in the legal status of married women.
 At present there is a draft before parliament concerning filiation, designed to ensure the equal status of all children before the law.
 As regards our work in public policy, we are seeking to promote equality of opportunity for all types of family units, and to make the family a place that generates equal opportunities and rights for all its members.
 In order to build a suitable national awareness, the Government has undertaken to encourage public debate and to open up opportunities for families, in various fields and spheres, thus increasing their resources and their possibilities.
 Our commitment to generate clear equality of opportunity, without distinction as to sex or status, has also led us to participate with enthusiasm and hope in the World Summit for Social Development to be held by the United Nations in Copenhagen next year.
 It shows us also that without democracy and without growth it is also impossible to eradicate poverty.
 We cannot attempt to be first rich, then free, and later on just.
 This has always been the illusion of authoritarianism and populism.
 The struggle against poverty is an imperative of justice, but it is also one of efficacy. Either development is by all and for all, or, in the long term, it is by and for no one.
 Today too the family offers a great opportunity to make progress in realizing the universal values on the basis of which the United Nations was founded: the values of democracy, of peace, of freedom and of justice.
 Here, we have sown the seeds of the future, and the harvest, we are sure, will bear the fruit of human dignity.
 Mr. K\x{95e5}y (Hungary): Let me state at the outset that the Government of the Republic of Hungary joined with pleasure and enthusiastic dedication in the United Nations initiative proposing that 1994 should be the International Year of the Family.
 Our pleasure and dedication were fuelled by the recognition that the family is a fundamental resource of the community and of society, and that, due to the manifold conflicts inherent in today's world, an increasing proportion of families need continual social support.
 This need for support is particularly prevalent in today's Hungary.
 Our Government and vulnerable Central and Eastern European Governments have been described as rowing between the Scylla of an overburdened State budget and the Charybdis of the political unpopularity of social budget reform offering less-than-universal benefits.
 This scenario requires increased efforts to educate the public about the viability of various options, about the long-term costs of attempting to maintain a virtually defunct system and about the strength of solidarity based on cooperating families.
 In my country all significant political elements agree with the slogan offered by the United Nations for this special year:
 "Building the smallest democracy at the heart of society."
 We believe that democracy begins with the family.
 A democratic society can be built on the basis of democratic families alone.
 Conversely, families that are democratic in their internal relationships can develop and function exclusively in democratic societies.
 In Hungary the Year of the Family has, in accordance with the recommendations of the United Nations, been intended as neither a single, isolated action nor as a representative campaign.
 It has been considered as an opportunity to call attention to the problems of families and, as such, perhaps to start rational political and social actions with a permanently beneficial influence on the lives of families.
 We are firmly committed to the development of a social policy that would provide more comprehensive support for families with several children.
 We intend to introduce more measures favouring unemployed parents and impoverished families with several children.
 The legislative preparations for the Act on Child Welfare and Protection have started.
 With this in mind, let me raise a point for further consideration.
 A United Nations statement on family-policy guidelines, similar to the Declaration of the Rights of the Child, is lacking.
 Such a document may promote the elaboration of national family strategies in Member States.
 Perhaps the forthcoming World Summit for Social Development will dwell upon this issue.
 Among the international events, we could mention the family conferences held jointly with our neighbouring countries.
 I must also mention the noble gestures made by our families who have hastened to help refugee families that have been separated and driven from their homes.
 International charity organizations have been of great help in this work.
 We consider the Salt Lake City Family Patron City Programme to be an excellent initiative.
 Over 21 Hungarian cities have joined it, and in the years to come it plans to operate an international network among the family-patron cities.
 I consider it very important to change our current concept of the family.
 We can now see the United Nations in the same way: as a family of nations bearing responsibility for each other.
 Our motto for the Year of the Family expresses this well: everyone needs a family, and the family counts on everyone.
 We thank the General Assembly for giving us this Year.
 I wish the General Assembly all the best in its work and success in its noble efforts."
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on His Excellency Mr. Aleksander Luczak, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Education of Poland.
 In proposing that the United Nations proclaim an International Year of the Family, we were guided by the belief that the family has always played an essential role in the lives of individuals and society alike.
 It fulfils extremely important functions, both economic and educational.
 It enables people to express themselves in everyday life and stimulates positive emotions.
 Indeed, the family constitutes a universal social unit which closely integrates the interests of the individual and the public.
 Basically, it performs a similar role in all countries, regardless of social and economic systems, religious beliefs or social and regional circumstances.
 The leading moral, political and religious authorities have been turning to the family as the most durable asset and primary hope for the future, for the family is the first and irreplaceable educator, the basis for the transmission of the values system and inter-generational experience.
 The Polish family has preserved national culture and transmitted its values to the young generations, even though by the eighteenth century the country had disappeared from the world political map.
 The fundamental political, social and economic transformations in today's world have a bearing of their own on the functioning of families.
 As a result, the priorities of social and individual values are changing, as are the norms, patterns and models of life.
 Yet nothing can replace the family in its educational and social functions.
 To some extent these issues were tackled by the World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna last year.
 The same issues are also being pursued by various international governmental and non-governmental organizations.
 This is surely a challenge, in view of the different family-life traditions in various countries.
 I hope, none the less, that obstacles to such a declaration will be surmounted.
 Systemic changes under way in Poland, including the advanced stage of transition to a market economy, necessitate the prompt elaboration of a new concept of social policies, particularly with respect to families.
 Credit facilities for housing are scarce and expensive.
 Companies have drastically reduced the scope of social benefits.
 Consequently, the economic and social security of many families has diminished.
 It is incumbent upon the Government to cushion the negative side-effects of transition - without altering the essential direction of reform.
 Reform of the social security system is subject to intensive analysis.
 An improved mother-and-child and young people's health- care programme is being implemented.
 A system of family doctors is planned.
 The State budget covers arrears of interest for housing credits owed to banks.
 Unfortunately, the country's present economic situation does not permit us to do more, nor can we afford to increase our budget deficit.
 The United Nations did well to focus on the family in 1994.
 The family has become the subject of wide-ranging, active and constructive international collaboration.
 Support for the family is a fundamental social responsibility for every Member State, whatever its social and political systems and no matter what differences exist in terms of religion or customs.
 Let me take this opportunity to express our appreciation to the Coordinator of the International Year of the Family and his staff for discharging their responsibilities in successfully preparing for this important event.
 Last April we hosted in Warsaw the XVIII International Congress of Families, organized in close cooperation with the World Organization for the Family, with broad support from the Catholic Church in Poland.
 One of the Committee's top priorities was, in accordance with United Nations guidelines, to initiate national and local actions to alleviate the hardships of everyday life of families and assist the resolution of conflicts within the family.
 The Committee succeeded in organizing summer holidays for a large number of children from low-income families and for children requiring special care.
 On its initiative, a number of local committees were formed in the provinces.
 Together with other nongovernmental organizations, those committees launched social welfare activities and the counselling of women and set up clubs and care centres for children, the elderly and young people from low-income families and from families at risk.
 We are determined to continue working together towards the multifaceted development of the family, taking advantage of such forthcoming international occasions as the World Summit for Social Development, to be held in Copenhagen next spring, or the Fourth World Conference on Women to be held next autumn in Beijing.
 When the International Year is over concern for the welfare, stability and sustained development of the family should continue to be at the centre of the attention of the international community, the United Nations system, and regional and non-governmental organizations.
 My Government fully supports extension of the efforts to attain the noble goals of the International Year of the Family and shares the lasting commitment of the United Nations to the family.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on the representative of Portugal.
 Mr. Soares (Portugal): It is a great honour for me to address the International Conference on Families on behalf of my country and to have this opportunity to express views on such crucial issues as those relating to the International Year of the Family.
 Nevertheless, I would like to convey some reflections relating to matters of great interest to my country.
 When 1994 was proclaimed the International Year of the Family, the General Assembly reiterated that the United Nations had acknowledged that families were the basic units of social life.
 In my country the family occupies a key position in the political and social system.
 These concerns found a place in the Portuguese Constitution, which states that the family, as a fundamental unit of society, is entitled to the protection of society and the State and to the creation of all the conditions necessary for the personal realization of its members.
 The family as a source of moral values is an age-old reality for us, one that has stood the test of time and resisted the challenge of fashion and circumstance.
 The Portuguese policy on the family takes into account modernity and progress and is inspired by the development and improvement in material living conditions, but it remains deeply committed to the humanistic values of a people and nation with many centuries of history.
 The International Year of the Family was therefore, from the Portuguese point of view, a most welcome initiative, and Portugal has participated wholeheartedly in its observance.
 The Commission carried out its work in close cooperation with local and regional authorities, schools, churches and non-governmental organizations, in order to achieve the goal of creating, among policy makers and the public at large, greater awareness of the family as the natural and fundamental unit of society.
 We must ensure that the ideas and recommendations that were put forward will materialize in concrete actions.
 Next year two important world conferences will take place - the World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women to be held in Beijing - in which issues related to the family will be at the centre of the debates.
 In this context, I should like to underline our main concerns on family policies.
 As has frequently been said on other occasions, the family, as the natural and fundamental group unit of society, is the fullest reflection of the strengths and weaknesses of a community.
 The President (interpretation from French): The next speaker is the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Labour, Human Services and Social Security, of the Republic of Guyana, Ms. Claudette Moore, upon whom I now call.
 Ms. Moore (Guyana): It is indeed a great honour for me to address this meeting on a matter of considerable importance to my country and to the international community of nations.
 The situation of the family is precious in Guyana, a land of six peoples who nevertheless have one destiny, for we subscribe to the dictum that a nation is as strong as its families.
 "The family is obviously the nucleus of all social, economic and political aspects of life, bound together by blood, unity of purpose and, most of all, tradition.
 In this connection a National Coordinating Committee was established in November 1993 to give effect to those efforts.
 Given the broad objectives and the seriousness attached to each objective, it was found desirable to establish subcommittees under the following headings: moral and legal, the disabled, youth, and the work environment.
 Members of the subcommittees were drawn from government agencies and from non-governmental organizations.
 "leave a lasting impression upon our minds and permanently guide our actions related to the uplifting of the family and our nation".
 Immediately following this announcement, non-governmental organizations, and in particularly the Church, initiated a launching ceremony at which the main speaker was His Excellency Dr. Cheddie Jagan, the President of Guyana.
 Programmes of awareness extended through March 1994 and involved government officials as well as Guyanese families.
 The Moral and Legal Sub-Committee has produced a draft family code.
 This was disseminated across the nation on 15 May 1994, which was observed as the International Day of Families.
 Work will continue with a view to incorporating all the views and issues that should be contained in such a code.
 This Sub-Committee has also begun to work on proposals for the establishment of a family court, with some input from senior legal professionals.
 The Sub-Committee for the Disabled will shortly execute plans that have been made for what is called Disability Awareness Month, which will commence on 4 November 1994 and will culminate, on 3 December, in observance of the International Day of the Disabled.
 The Ministry of Health, as Guyana's lead Ministry on disability, is in the process of reorganizing and expanding the National Rehabilitation Committee as a National Commission on Disability, one of whose first tasks will be the formulation of a national disability policy.
 Guyana can be described as a young country as 40 per cent, or more, of its population are below 35 years of age.
 Programmes to demonstrate the importance of youth and the complementary nature of family members in the development of literacy skills, civic consciousness, moral education and family values were undertaken in collaboration with the Commonwealth Youth Programme as part of our observances.
 This approach, involving the training and guidance of semi-literate people by literate members of society, was intended to emphasize the position and status of the family as a key social institution, to reinforce family ties and to have a multiplier effect on the rest of society.
 Consistent with its commitment to youth, the Government submitted a paper on national youth policy in June 1994.
 It is intended that the mechanisms established will provide young people with scope for self-expression and will make provision for appropriate programme development.
 The efforts of the Work Environment Committee, on the other hand, are geared to securing the involvement of the private sector and social-service institutions to assist in improving working conditions for people with family responsibilities.
 We have set as the major focus the achievement of the International Labour Organization's aim of ratification of Convention 156 during this year or shortly thereafter.
 It is noteworthy that, as a consequence, Guyana has fulfilled all preliminary legal requirements for ratification of this Convention.
 It also provides for men and women to enjoy equal rights and the same legal status in all spheres of economic life.
 In addition, the Equal Rights Act 1990 removes all forms of discrimination based on sex and provides for equal opportunities for men and women.
 The work of this Committee is therefore concentrated on the establishment of the social infrastructure that is necessary to alleviating the burden of family responsibilities on the productivity of workers.
 The establishment of adequate care facilities for children in and out of school, elderly people and other family members is currently being examined.
 As an extension of our work in this area, Guyana will join other countries in the Caribbean in a regional workshop later in the year.
 It is hoped that efforts will then be combined to develop strategies for implementation of the Convention at the regional level.
 Changes in the structure and composition of families have been almost universal, but important socio-economic and cultural functions performed by families should be preserved and transmitted to succeeding generations.
 Guyana will therefore seek to ensure that a plan of action is informed by the deliberations and activities of the International Year of the Family, with goals peculiar to our local situation but consistent with the universality of the human family.
 The eight delegations, which include those of the first three speakers in the debate, are those of Egypt, Germany, Hungary, India, Poland, Portugal, the United Arab Emirates, the United States of America.
 Mrs. Pulido de Brice (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): The Government of Venezuela attaches particular importance to the discussion of social matters.
 When we speak of social matters we necessarily look to the major agent in the building of society, which is, of course, the family.
 In the framework of a mixture of races, we have a society characterized by egalitarian values.
 Cultures meet in the family, and social mobilization is part of that reality.
 The many years of extolling individualism have not undermined our families.
 We are grateful for this opportunity, at such a difficult time, to focus our attention on the family, to discover all the ways in which it is organized, as a flexible and clear response to the need to adapt to new times.
 The realities of shortages and changes in family life in our society demonstrate that decisions based solely on the quest for material and technological progress are outdated.
 Now more than ever we must address the cultural values and aspirations that give meaning to our lives as we face the future.
 How can coexistence be achieved without strengthening people, the basis of the entire life cycle. The institution of the family is the basic cell, because that is where we are born, where we live and where we die.
 Until recently, the family was a purely private setting; we were indifferent to it; we did not want to get involved in the discussions that were part of everyday life.
 In this world, there is not time to develop options or opportunities or aspirations to build social relations that go beyond the immediate.
 Responsible parenthood, which is a reality in our region, is not simply a matter of will.
 Among our young people today, 30 per cent are excluded from the school system, while 20 per cent leave the school system for a life of poverty.
 How can one assume responsibility without taking all those factors into account?
 The International Year of the Family has involved opening up new channels for discussion in Venezuelan society.
 Thirty-eight percent of our population - 580,000 families - lives in a state of critical poverty.
 Many of them are products of migration.
 Our country, in this context, is a symbol of prospects for the future.
 We are not yet able to deny this opportunity to other peoples, but we must also face our inability to find our own identity.
 What has been the strategy of our country? Three major problems have been the focus of our attention.
 That is why we have a wide-ranging programme - like our Ayacucho Fund - that uses oil income for the training of human resources in higher education.
 We have allocated 4 billion bolivars for training our citizens, for integrating our young people from 8 to 16 years old into the labour market.
 The diversification of the local economy could be an option for the future, but at the present time, our local, informal economy, without technology or social security, does very little to incorporate our young people.
 I should like to take this opportunity to outline the major options involved in our definition of family policy.
 Public policies, focused solely on caring for vulnerable sectors of the population, are merely a segment of the concept of integration.
 Family policies should regard the family as a component of the social, political and economic elements.
 I wish to make another point that I find interesting.
 While it is very tempting to focus on the most vulnerable, we also need to develop \x{5e68}ite groups that have the ability to shape and direct that sector.
 If the State is to have an authoritarian and centralizing role, it must involve all the groups of civil society, not simply as interlocutors of the State, but as interlocutors of a society which is also capable of diversification.
 First, we believe that assistance policies are needed.
 When we have such large sectors that are poor, we cannot expect them to have the strength to make the journey by themselves.
 It has often been said that we should not give the people fish, but should teach them how to fish.
 The second aspect relates to social-investment policies in which the conditions are established for the family to play its socializing role.
 We cannot blame families for not playing that role if we take away from them the tools for change.
 Why do we take the family into account nowadays? Because technological and material progress have failed to respond to our needs for development as human beings.
 If, as has been stated in the context of the social summit, we really want to design participative policies, then family policies must provide for relations of interdependence; of globalization of the problems of society; of reinterpretation of the values of equity, solidarity and civil responsibility.
 The collectivity must be rebuilt as an expression of all human beings.
 Only in this way can we say that we are really caring for our people.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I now call on the representative of China, Mr. Wang Xuexian.
 Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The United Nations is a big international family composed of 184 Member States.
 We deeply appreciate the fruitful work carried out by the Secretariat of the United Nations, the regional preparatory meetings and, in particular, Mr. Sakolski, Coordinator for the International Year of the Family.
 Since the adoption by the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session of the resolution which proclaimed 1994 the International Year of the Family, countries in all parts of the world have made positive responses.
 This tradition has been enhanced by the development of family relations towards equality, democracy and harmony.
 We the Chinese have always taken pride in our happy and harmonious families.
 In May last year, China had the honour to invite representatives or observers from 26 countries and regions and 17 United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations to participate in the Asia and Pacific Regional Preparatory Meeting for the International Year of the Family, held in Beijing.
 The meeting was highly successful, and the Beijing Declaration it adopted was viewed with favour by all sides.
 In February 1993, the Chinese Government set up its own Coordinating Committee composed of representatives of a dozen Government departments and organizations.
 Over the past year China has carried out many diverse activities, organized and guided by its national Committee.
 On 15 May this year, Beijing celebrated the International Day of the Family.
 Many specialists, scholars and governmental officials participated in the activities, going into the main streets and outdoor public places to explain and give advice and answer questions on China's family law and to share their specific legal and scientific knowledge.
 On the same day, the award ceremony for the Model Family was held.
 Before the ceremony, there were nation-wide activities in connection with the choice of the model family. Thirty families won gold, silver and other honourary awards.
 They are all families that have made significant contributions to society and enjoy family harmony and rich family life, thus winning great respect.
 The International Symposium on the Family and the Next Generation was held to discuss the building of family culture and youth education.
 It is well known that the family is the natural and basic unit of society and plays a very important role in social development.
 The family is both the beneficiary of and the active participant in social development.
 Without happy and harmonious families, it is impossible to maintain a happy and harmonious society.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the Permanent Representative of Paraguay, Mr. Jos F\x{5e68}ix Ferndez Estigarribia.
 Mr. Fernandez Estigarribia (Paraguay) (interpretation from Spanish): I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States at this meeting on the International Year of the Family.
 When we speak about change in our societies and its influence on the issue now before us, it cannot escape us that the family is at the same time and from another standpoint a powerful renovating agent.
 It is in the family that generally accepted knowledge is reassessed and subtly added to and changed, without losing sight of the essential values of our common civilization.
 For this reason strengthening our democracies also involves intensifying the debate on the role of the family because of its influence as a first educator of free and egalitarian consciences.
 This of course is a long-standing concern of the United Nations.
 To prove that assertion, we need only glance again at the remarkable Convention on the Rights of the Child, one of the most broadly ratified instruments.
 The basis for the recovery of the family, which is needed for greater promotion of human rights, equality between the sexes, individual freedoms and greater emphasis on the rights of the child, will be determined by the extent of international cooperation and governmental concern.
 In the last decade of the twentieth century there have been two major trends - the ageing of the population and the development of family structures.
 These trends may be regarded as different aspects of modernization and call for a substantive response from Governments and from various members of the family.
 However, United Nations forecasts indicate that the ageing of the population most strikingly affects the developing world, as shown by the following statistics.
 A total of 40 million is forecast for the year 2000, and 93 million for the year 2025.
 At the same time, life expectancy at birth will rise in Latin America from 51.2 years for the period 1950-1955 to 71.8 years for the period 2020-2025.
 This indicates that this region cannot be considered a "young region", as there is an accelerated demographic transition taking place towards lower birth and mortality rates.
 We trust that in 1995 at the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing and the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen major steps forward will be taken in the process of consolidating the family structure.
 The preparatory meetings at regional and international level, combined with the facilitating activities of the secretariat of the International Year of the Family, have produced many valuable proposals which have guided national committees in formulating their national programmes.
 These meetings give the international community the opportunity adequately to address the problems of poverty, unemployment, disintegration and disease and how they affect the family.
 This is reflected in the theme chosen for the International Year of the Family by the national committee, namely, "The Family in Changing Socio-economic Circumstances".
 Therefore we support the integration of programmes to promote the development of the family into overall social and economic development planning.
 The concept that social and family issues are a secondary matter in contrast with the primary process taking place in the political forums, is a serious mistake.
 Therefore, the Government has given due consideration to the specific social, economic and cultural priorities and needs of the various family types and their individual members.
 Studies have shown that the majority of these women have a low education level and, therefore, exercise the lowest paid professions.
 Furthermore, the Government also guarantees elementary services in the fields of health, education and housing for this vulnerable group.
 The Committee, which is chaired by the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly of Suriname, consists of 14 representatives of ministries and religious and non-governmental organizations.
 Other projects were financed by several local funding agencies, the private sector and the Government.
 In conclusion, I would like to thank the Organization for the praiseworthy initiative of organizing this Conference, thus enabling national committees to exchange experiences and discuss follow-up activities on an issue of such great importance for all our countries and peoples.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I call next on the representative of the Russian Federation, Her Excellency Mrs. Ludmilla Bezlepkina, Minister for Social Protection.
 Mrs. Bezlepkina (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): I am greatly honoured to address the Assembly on the question of the family.
 On that basis, the Russian Federation attaches great importance to this question, which the General Assembly is rightly discussing.
 We convey special thanks to Mr. Henryk Sakolski, whose participation in the work of the International Scientific and Practical Conference on the Family and the Development Process, held at Moscow in November 1993, enhanced the importance of that Conference.
 Russia has submitted to today's Conference on the question of the family a brief report entitled "Policy Relating to the Family and the Holding of the International Year of the Family in the Russian Federation".
 Today I should like to draw attention to world-wide trends whose emergence at the national level is causing great concern.
 I refer to the reduction in the level at which the family, as a social institution, can provide its members with social and physical security.
 The factors at work here are the growth of poverty, violence, the number of orphans, loneliness, drug addiction, prostitution and alcoholism. These are all characteristics of our times.
 Above all, we should be concerned about protecting the interests and the rights of children, who are totally dependent on the decisions and actions of adults; but their future will depend on what those decisions and actions are.
 Society as a whole pays a very high social price for this.
 The State, for its part, must actively help to develop a system of social services and their provision and assure the right and opportunity for their use, as well as the corresponding regimes and guarantees of employment.
 Only through such an approach can we talk about real ways of achieving the rights and freedoms of the individual on the principle of the elimination of all forms of discrimination, particularly discrimination against women.
 Only such an approach can ensure greater participation and the corresponding greater responsibility of women, involving them in the management of resources and in taking decisions at all social levels.
 Our common efforts at the international and national levels will help us move into the twenty-first century on the basis of the principles of real priority interests of the individual and spiritual and moral development which to a great extent, is assisted by the family.
 Achieving this must be the goal of the further historical development of the family's economic, political and social transformations.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I now call on His Excellency Mr. Pawan Kumar Bansal, Member of Parliament of India.
 Mr. Pawan Kumar Bansal (India): It is most appropriate that we should be celebrating the International Year of the Family this year and addressing related issues in the General Assembly.
 India believes that the family is the basic building-block of society.
 Individuals have not only rights in society, but responsibilities to society as well, and to the global family as a whole, as is reflected in the ancient Indian concept of "Vasudhaiva Kutumbhakam", that is, the world is but a family.
 This is based upon the interconnections of literacy, economic and social development and population control.
 In India, the family has been the basic unit of stability and integration in a society of free choice.
 Indian family-welfare programmes are significantly based on voluntary participation.
 India's family welfare programme is funded by the central Government.
 In an effort to impart dynamism to our family-welfare programme, a focused and result-oriented action plan has been developed over the last few years.
 India fully accepts the goal of universalizing services for sexual and reproductive health care, of meeting the unmet needs by the year 2015, as envisaged at Cairo, and of removing all programme-related barriers by 2005.
 We aim to implement the Cairo Programme of Action at the national level, with international cooperation as appropriate and in accordance with the United Nations Charter.
 The Constitution of India recognizes the special needs of these specific groups and makes a number of provisions to protect and promote their interests.
 It is in this tradition that the constitutional provision on the directive principles of State policy has informed the policy-making of successive Governments in India in order to ensure social justice for all.
 The disadvantaged sections constitute about 25 per cent of the population.
 Their development is being pursued through some of the largest affirmative-action programmes in the world in their favour in education, employment and other areas.
 Today, special emphasis is placed by the Government on rehabilitation programmes for slum dwellers, comprehensive legislation for the rights of people with disabilities, and wider education of the disabled.
 A national programme for developing technologies for the disabled was launched in 1988.
 We have also set up special employment exchanges and special cells for handicapped persons all over the country.
 The Integrated Rural Development Programme and the Prime Minister's New Employment Scheme support training programmes for youth towards self-employment in all Indian states.
 These programmes provide technical and basic managerial skills as well as loans and subsidies to youth in the age group of 18 to 35 years and to families living below the poverty line, to enable them to become self-employed.
 India has registered considerable success in the functioning and development of the cooperative movement in a democratic society.
 Other conclusions of the report need further study.
 The societies which have overlooked the importance of traditional family values in their pursuit of personal excellence and prosperity are today re-emphasizing the role of the individual within the family.
 In this International Year of the Family, let us reaffirm our faith in the family as the nucleus of a healthy and orderly society.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Malta, Mr. Joseph Cassar.
 Mr. Cassar (Malta): These Meetings of the General Assembly are significant not only because they coincide with the observance of the International Year of the Family, but also, and even more, because they reflect the importance Member States ascribe to the family.
 Throughout history, the family has always been considered the basic unit of society.
 The International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo again acknowledged and reaffirmed this fact.
 Malta is honoured to have contributed to the negotiations which ensured that this principle was given the attention it merits in the Conference's final document.
 The family is an essential element for secure social development.
 It provides a source of mutual love, respect, solidarity and affection and acts as a support system for its individual members, encouraging personal growth and respect for individual rights.
 The family, however, is also influenced by the nature and pace of change.
 It is today subject to numerous pressures that make it extremely vulnerable and thus it requires, more than ever before, the support of other institutions.
 The international community's celebration of the International Year of the Family is a long-overdue acknowledgement.
 In preparation for this International Year of the Family, Malta had the privilege of hosting the United Nations Europe and North America Preparatory Meeting in April 1993 and the World NGO Forum in November 1993.
 The Valletta Declaration issued by the Europe and North America Preparatory Meeting reaffirmed a wide-ranging commitment to the family and invited the United Nations, intergovernmental organizations and Member States to encourage and support regional cooperation with respect to family matters.
 By safeguarding and promoting the values and unity of the family, we further strengthen the protection of human rights.
 The State should support and protect the family and facilitate its role.
 Such a role requires the safeguarding of human rights, ranging from the equal rights of men and women to social security; from the right to education to the right to life of the unborn child.
 In giving its support, the State should not exploit the family in order to ensure a larger or smaller work force.
 Decisions of this nature should not be made under pressure by the State through such methods as limiting the number of children eligible for State subsidies.
 Since Malta's independence 30 years ago, successive Governments in Malta have worked to give tangible form to these convictions.
 In marriage and within the family, husband and wife are recognized, in practice and in the eyes of the law, to be equal partners.
 They are jointly responsible for the care and upbringing of the children and are expected to reach agreement on all matters of importance to family life.
 The status of women has been enhanced through fundamental changes that give the necessary recognition to the dignity of the person - a dignity shared by all individual members of the family.
 Women should not be discriminated against.
 My Government believes that the family offers the best psychological milieu for stable personality development, as well as the niche where one assimilates moral values and cherished social customs.
 Above all, it provides solidarity to all its members, particularly those with special needs owing to disability, emotional stress or ageing.
 Social security is universal, and assistance is provided to the unemployed and to persons without any source of income.
 Pensions for the elderly and the disabled provide adequate financial income to ensure integration.
 These benefits, together with universal health care, help foster solidarity and diminish that stress which persons with special needs exert on the family.
 Protection and assistance help the family to fully assume its responsibility as the basic unit of society.
 As the natural environment for children and youth, and the most desirable support system for the elderly and the disabled, the strengthening of the family should be given priority by national Governments, intergovernmental organizations and concerned non-governmental organizations.
 In recent years, the family and social change have been the subject of considerable discussion in Malta.
 The Government and non-governmental organizations, in supporting the family, emphasize preventive measures such as counselling before and during marriage.
 In cases of marital breakdown, hostel facilities and accommodation at affordable rents are provided whenever possible.
 During the past 30 years, economic development and the increasing level of employment have been instrumental in raising the standard of living.
 Drug abuse is a cause of concern.
 These abundant references to the family should be embodied in a coherent and comprehensive document on the functions, responsibilities and rights of the family.
 Such an international document on the family would have a direct impact on its members and on the role of the family in society.
 That is why my Government believes that in the follow-up to this Year of the Family, we should harmonize our efforts to consolidate peace and democracy with efforts to promote social justice on a global scale.
 Families can realize their full potential only in a world where peace and freedom prevail and in a just society free from inequities.
 Poverty, hunger, illiteracy, racial discrimination, the degradation of the environment, armed conflict and other calamities greatly impede the normal development of the family in vast areas of the world.
 Political and economic instability have uprooted millions from their homes.
 In a spirit of international solidarity, many States have welcomed the victims of these modern-day scourges.
 Subsidiarity is a key principle of contemporary society.
 Our efforts to bring decision-making close to those most affected by it should find immediate resonance in matters which have a direct impact on the family.
 The erosion of the family as an institution cannot but result in fissures which threaten the stability of those very societies which we cherish most.
 The President (interpretation from Spanish): I now call on the Deputy Permanent Representative of Japan, Mr. Shunji Maruyama.
 Mr. Maruyama (Japan): Before commencing my remarks, I would like to express my appreciation to Mr. Henryk J. Sokalski, Coordinator for the International Year of the Family, for his excellent work in promoting observance of the Year.
 It is universally recognized that the family constitutes the basic unit of society and that it assumes diverse forms and functions which reflect the diversity of individual preferences and social conditions.
 It acts as a leading agent in promoting the well-being of the larger social entities that are built on it, and it thus plays a critical role in social development.
 Everywhere, the family provides both physical and spiritual support for its members, and particularly for those who are most vulnerable, such as children, working adults, and the aged.
 Bearing all this in mind, the Government of Japan is in full accord with the objectives of the International Year of the Family, which provides Member States with an excellent opportunity to re-evaluate and promote the family's unique role and functions in various aspects of our life.
 The Year is an occasion to promote the concept of the family as the smallest working democracy, one that operates at the very heart of society.
 Japan welcomes the vast array of initiatives undertaken by Member States in support of families, and, for its part, it is carrying out a number of public-information activities in observance of the Year.
 Among the events organized by the Government of Japan are seminars and concerts, and the issuance of special commemorative stamps.
 Local governments and non-governmental organizations are also making important contributions in promoting the role and functions of the family in bringing about social progress.
 This is especially important in the light of the trend towards smaller families in Japan, which often diminishes the ability of the basic social group to care for its members, particularly children, the disabled and the elderly.
 I would like to take this opportunity to announce that in April of this commemorative Year Japan ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child as part of its effort to address such concerns.
 This series of plenary meetings of the General Assembly has given us an invaluable opportunity to familiarize ourselves with the various policies and programmes being adopted and executed by other Member States.
 My delegation believes that in following up the Year we should pay greater attention to the family in the national policies we formulate.
 The pivotal role of the family in the development process will be a key issue at the upcoming World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women.
 These high-level forums can make an invaluable contribution to ensuring the success of the Year and an effective follow-up to it.
 As we come to the end of the International Year of the Family we should remain active in promoting the inherent strength of the family and in strengthening its role and functions in contributing to national, regional, and international sustainable development.
 Mrs. Sirelkhtim (Sudan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 The President (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands, Mr. N. H. Beigman.
 Mr. Biegman (Netherlands): In the Netherlands, the working definition of a family is "a living unit in which the care and the upbringing of the child takes place".
 We attach great importance to the breadth of this definition and to the concept of "living unit".
 Government policies and specific measures may affect these living units, but they are not focused on or geared to families as such.
 They focus on the individual citizens, and particularly the children, belonging to the families, or the living units.
 However, the Netherlands Government ultimately decided to join in the preparations, and it established an independent National Committee provided with a substantial Government subsidy and corporate sponsorship.
 Hence, after this somewhat hesitant start, the year of the family in the Netherlands has provided a basis for socially relevant activities and projects.
 The Netherlands National Committee participated actively in the closing conference of the International Year of the Family in Montreal last week, with a view to fostering acceptance and recognition of alternative family arrangements.
 Please allow me to explain, briefly, the Netherlands' position and to elucidate what we consider to be "a family".
 While the Netherlands recognizes the family as a basic unit of society, we also recognize the diversity of family life, lifestyles and structures within and between societies.
 This diversity has been confirmed by findings of the World Economic Survey, which states that at present about 35 per cent of all households worldwide are run by women.
 Government policy in the Netherlands is therefore geared to individuals in all their various situations.
 This includes families, comparable social units and those who do not live in a family.
 The government should focus on the upbringing and education of children.
 In our opinion, children should be the focus of our attention, whether they are living at home or have left home but remain dependent - for example those who, because of their studies or for various other reasons, are temporarily away from home - or, of course, are homeless.
 Because its policy is focused on children rather than on the family as such, the Netherlands does not have anything like a family policy, which makes it difficult for us to go along with international positions regarding such policies.
 In a worldwide context, family structures, traditions and values differ so markedly that it seems unlikely that international consultations on family matters could result in widely applicable international measures to strengthen family life.
 In closing, let me stress that we feel very strongly that attention to families in all their varieties should never lead to diminished attention to the rights of the individual.
 In the end, all living units are composed of individuals, and it is respect for the rights and dignity of the individual that can promote greater understanding between people, nations and cultures.
 Mr. Pallais Arana (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): The staggering changes taking place on the international scene affect the scope of relations between States themselves as well as relationships among social groups, which within those societies have their separate identities, lifestyles and cultures.
 The family, commonly regarded as the basic unit of society and the focus of the social organization network, is undergoing a rapid process of change, which in some societies is affecting the very concept of the family.
 The Cairo Conference reaffirmed the concept of the family as a natural and fundamental nucleus of society.
 In countries where conflicts have taken on a dimension of social violence, families have been affected by forced separation, displacement and family disintegration.
 In all these cases children are affected the most.
 In the governmental programme outlined by Her Excellency President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, there is a clear statement of political resolve to direct resources to the full ethical, economic and social recovery of the Nicaraguan nuclear family, after a decade of political and military conflict.
 The family passes on values and rules of behaviour and plays an important role in economic, political, social and cultural aspects of society.
 Nicaragua's political Constitution stipulates that the family is the fundamental nucleus of society and has a right to the protection of society and the State and to the safeguarding of its rights.
 The present Constitution, and the laws adopted under the Constitution, provide for the rights of the family.
 The Government of Nicaragua is today determined to conserve such basic values of the Nicaraguan family as solidarity among family members and, above all, the family's educational function as a transmitter of moral and civic values.
 Since 1993 parents have been actively participating in that Ministry's consultative councils and in schools and institutes at the basic-education level.
 Management has been made more democratic through community participation by the creation of departmental health councils, which have had a decisive impact on the organization of services and their effectiveness.
 The Ministry has also tried to achieve collective agreements and compacts to guarantee incentives such as accident insurance, supplements based on seniority, maternity protection and indemnity based on seniority at the end of the labour contract.
 Further, the Nicaraguan Institute for Agrarian Reforms is proceeding to assign crop-land titles to families in order to promote the preservation of family heritage, thus maintaining family unity.
 We believe that peace is a process that must begin in the Nicaraguan family, a family that has been divided by a decade of wars and antagonisms of all kinds.
 The President (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on His Excellency Mr. Reaz Rahman, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh.
 Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): Five years ago the Assembly decided to proclaim the year 1994 the International Year of the Family.
 Indeed, the resolution adopted by the Assembly at its forty-seventh session expressed awareness that families are the fullest reflection, at the grass-roots level, of the strengths and weaknesses of the social and developmental welfare environment and as such offer a uniquely comprehensive and synthesizing approach to social issues.
 Today, the basic challenge facing us is to bolster the position of families as a major catalyst for social progress and development and to reinforce their role as the key nucleus for promoting moral and ethical values, education, rights and responsibilities and the fundamental foundation for democracy.
 If the impressive achievements of the International Year of the Family are to have any last effect, a crucial imperative will be to consolidate and implement follow-up actions to the goals we have set together.
 Bangladesh has been attaching due importance to the observance of the Year and to looking beyond it.
 A broad array of activities have been undertaken to celebrate it.
 These include a series of constructive activities befitting families across the country.
 Emphasis on gender equality in society and in the family has been an additional factor in the creation of a greater awareness of the role of individual members within this the basic unit of society.
 A major target that has been reached is unanimous recognition of the role of families in fostering sustained growth and sustainable development.
 Bangladesh's Department of Social Services is implementing a number of programmes, both in urban and in rural areas, to ensure balanced socio-economic development of families.
 Emphasis is being laid on both moral and material family development.
 The areas of this development include health, sanitation, education, the skills required for self-employment, and recreation.
 Families are truly the building-blocks of societies and the essential fabric of human relationships.
 We are deeply committed to appropriately supporting and sustaining families as the means of providing a better future for our children and as a fundamental social unit to strengthen the local community, national society and the global community.
 The President (interpretation from Arabic): I call on the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein, Mrs. Claudia Fritsche.
 When the International Year of the Family was being launched, it was affirmed that families as the fundamental group units of society are entitled to maximum protection and assistance to enable them to fulfil their roles in ensuring the development of their individual members and of society.
 Families continue to be the primary caring institutions.
 They look after members who are young or elderly, ill or disabled.
 It is through the family that children acquire the knowledge and skills that will serve them as adults.
 There is no simple view of the family, and no easy definition of family policy.
 Yet, policies and programmes tend to be based on concepts and family models which, because of the major changes that most societies have undergone in recent decades, may no longer reflect reality.
 The traditional forms of family are changing.
 Improvements in communication and access to information enable individual family members to have increased contact with ideas and behavioural norms that go beyond their traditional spheres.
 Economic factors force families to separate when members migrate in search of employment.
 Within a relatively short time, extended families have shrunk, and single-parent families are no longer the exception.
 Today, between a quarter and a third of all households worldwide are headed by single parents, of whom 90 per cent are women.
 One of the most demanding aspects of the daily lives of many families, especially single-parent and female-headed families, is the constant need to balance work and familial responsibilities.
 There is a great need for social-support systems appropriate to individual cases.
 It therefore seems necessary that major attention be given to examining and fostering new roles and responsibilities for men.
 Fathers could be given wider access to education in family life, and parental leave and other incentives could be provided, to encourage and enable them to play new, wider roles, especially with regard to home-making, child care and family planning.
 Affected as they are by continuing social, economic, cultural and political pressures, women should be enabled to explore new opportunities for education and employment and to balance work and familial responsibilities.
 Families are valuable resources for the prevention of crime and delinquency.
 An important issue is the prevention of domestic violence.
 Women experience violence as a form of control that limits their ability to pursue options in almost every area of life.
 It hinders the human development of women themselves, and it affects the well-being of children and families.
 We welcome the appointment of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women.
 In agreeing to appoint a Special Rapporteur, the Conference recognized gender-based violence in both public and private spheres as a human-rights violation.
 In creating family-support infrastructures, the State and its institutions are only the backdrop.
 It was against this background that a programme for the provision of assistance to families in times of crisis and periods of transition was initiated.
 It has been said frequently that the family, being the natural and fundamental group unit of society, is the fullest reflection of the strengths and weaknesses of a community.
 In spite of the many changes in society that have influenced its role, the family continues to provide the natural framework for the emotional and material support that is essential to the growth and development of its members.
 A strong and democratic family should be promoted as an important element of an equally strong and democratic society.
 The President (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mr. Gholamali Khoshroo.
 The family, as the most fundamental institution for human growth and happiness, has, in recent decades, been threatened by structural and cultural transformations in Western societies.
 The intrusion of the market approach into everyday life has severely weakened the belief and practices which were common in family, religious and local communities.
 As modernism proceeds, strong ties in traditional communities become weaker and weaker, while the need to care for each other grows stronger and stronger.
 Thus, we are in a paradoxical situation: to become more modern leads to a reliance on the market and bureaucracy, which contributes to the destruction of modernism itself.
 To solve this dilemma, we must attach utmost importance to the family, education and religion.
 It is very sad that in the current situation the foundation of the family has become so weak that individual autonomy has replaced moral and social responsibility.
 Accordingly, narrow individualism, which dramatically focuses on immediate personal affairs, is continuously developing at the cost of public happiness and social coherence.
 Such maximization of self-interest, accompanied by the increasing attachment to the comforts of life, has led to the dissolution of social ties and family relations.
 These tragic changes in Western societies have resulted in a high proportion of divorce - almost one out of two marriages - widespread reluctance to marry, and an increasing acceptance of premarital and extra-marital sexual relations.
 Worse still, the spread of sexual abuse within the family and domestic violence have brought about an increasing number of runaways and crimes.
 The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran has, since its inception, made every effort to create a conducive and encouraging environment for families to flourish in.
 Articles 10, 21, 29, 30 31 and 43 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran frame laws, regulations and national plans connected with families and their stability.
 Thus, the Islamic Republic of Iran regards the family as the core of society and supports any movement that contributes to its strengthening and enhancement.
 Declaring 1994 the International Year of the Family emphasized the need for more intense attention to and a thorough re-evaluation of existing difficulties faced by families in the world.
 The Islamic Republic of Iran supports the initiatives launched by the International Year of the Family because it believes in the need for expanding collective efforts to eliminate common problems.
 We have participated wholeheartedly and actively in these activities.
 The first step was the formation of a national committee comprising various organizations within the country.
 These organizations manage the affairs of children, women, youth, the elderly and the disabled.
 The many sessions held by this committee resulted in the compilation of a national report.
 We wish to stress the fact that the family plays the important role of giving society new members who can play an appropriate and constructive part in its social activities.
 It is the family that passes on the culture, and the history, thereby ensuring the continuity of a people.
 There is a world-wide crisis of values.
 In Peru the danger of social disintegration has been aggravated by a prolonged socio-economic crisis, which, fortunately, is being overcome.
 There have been other causes also demographic problems, migratory phenomena and urban sprawl.
 All of these factors have a negative effect on the harmonious development of the family and tend to its breakdown.
 It deserves particular attention because it increases the vulnerability of the most vulnerable sectors, particularly women and children.
 Two decades of terrorist violence and drug trafficking and the corruption ensuing therefrom, have also contributed seriously to the breakdown of the family.
 For that reason we Peruvians enthusiastically hail the national victory over terrorism and the Government's resolution to combat drug trafficking.
 At this stage of its history, Peruvian society, which is multicultural, is becoming more closely knit and is acquiring a greater degree of communication, all of which will help to define the image of the new Peruvian citizen.
 The Institute has as its premise the idea that neither violence nor poverty can justify the breakdown of family ties, which are the sole guarantee of the training of responsible adults who can play a useful part in society.
 Similarly, it is aware that Peruvian families are carrying out new forms of survival through self-management organizations that enable them to face the social, economic and moral crisis in a spirit of solidarity, playing the leading role that is theirs within the process of social change.
 Combining family well-being and active participation by the community, the Institute works on the basis of two programmatic approaches.
 Secondly, there is the programmatic aspect of the social integration of children and adolescents who are in especially difficult circumstances.
 Special attention is directed towards the problems of children and adolescents from birth to 18 years of age in cases where they have difficulties in achieving integrated development because of bio-psycho-social deficiencies.
 An effort is being made to help them adopt acceptable patterns of social behaviour so that they can become reintegrated into society and the family.
 Peru is taking resolute action to resolve the urgent problems of its population.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on Her Excellency, Mrs. Miriam Sirelkhatim, State Minister, Ministry of Social Planning of the Sudan.
 Mrs. Sirelkhatim (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): From a homeland where family values reign, I should like to greet you, Mr. President, on behalf of Sudan, its people and its Government.
 The family is the nucleus of society and its solid foundation.
 It is the ideal environment for character-building.
 The two spouses should educate their children on the basis of piety, without discriminating in any way between girls and boys, so that they may grow up imbued with positive moral values, proper behaviour and generosity.
 They should also receive a proper education and enjoy a happy childhood as members of society and in their immediate environment.
 They should, then, be aware of the society that surrounds them and respect it through, for example, acquiring a love of art and beauty.
 Children should also understand the munificence of the universe and the importance for human beings of following the proper path and preserving the environment, as well as the need to love their work, their neighbour and their homeland.
 Children should be brought up to have a positive attitude towards all humanity and should be imbued with a spirit of sacrifice and generosity.
 Open-minded dialogue and social interaction should help them follow the path of righteousness and avoid evil.
 They should accept diversity and differences of opinion, and they should be generous.
 These are also values which they should be taught to acquire.
 Furthermore, the Ministry for Social Planning was created in order to develop society on the basis of a global concept.
 It is the largest Ministry in Sudan.
 In this connection, the Minister for Social Planning issued ministerial decree number 21 of 1994 to create a national committee under the chairmanship of the Minister of State for Social Planning within the framework of the International Year's official celebration.
 The committee's functions include providing for the protection of the family, ensuring social justice and cohesion and securing prosperity of our citizens on the basis of full respect for their economic and social rights.
 Rural and immigrant families also receive enjoy special assistance.
 Special training programmes for the women of such families have been introduced.
 It is hoped that, on 31 October 1994, there will be a special colloquium in Khartoum on the social and human aspects of the Sudanese family.
 As part of the interest shown in the family, vulnerable families and orphans are cared for by the State.
 General guidelines have been laid down accordingly in order, inter alia, to develop the means of funding, data and statistics gathering and reviewing existing legislation.
 Medical assistance and education are given to these children.
 Those children were in fact taken away by force.
 The council helps those families to market their products and, thereby to improve their standard of living.
 The high-level committee for productive families has held intensive meetings, and 300 million Sudanese pounds have been allocated to projects for families involved in production.
 To this end, a special committee has been set up by a presidential decree.
 The Committee has done very good work so far and has provided a large number of people with much-needed clothing under the slogan: Clothing for All.
 Women have also achieved high-level status within government.
 As to medical services and family planning, campaigns have been launched, especially in rural areas, to distribute medicine to children and pregnant women.
 Meetings and campaigns have been organized on health care for women and families.
 As to the protection of the environment, the Sudanese State is developing alternative energy resources and making it possible for families to earn a living without damaging the environment.
 The handicapped also enjoy special attention from the Sudanese Government.
 They enjoy all rights without discrimination.
 The State is making a particular effort to provide vaccines, especially against polio.
 As a result, there has been a considerable reduction in the number of victims of that crippling disease.
 With a view to protecting the family, the Sudanese State has raised the slogan of sports for all, so that all citizens may lead a healthy life.
 The elderly, for their part, are protected by the Sudanese State and enjoy great respect in our society, especially as our religion urges us to respect our elders, as well as our neighbours, the poor, orphans and the disinherited.
 As we celebrate the International Year of the Family, we hope that we are laying the foundations for a united family, the building block of tomorrow's society.
 We must imbue our families with moral values and abolish social discrimination on the basis of religion, ethnicity or culture.
 Moral values ensure the cohesion of society and should be consolidated.
 We cannot achieve this without an international commitment to these objectives.
 We are proud to propose the idea of a productive family, which would contribute to solving the problem of poverty in the world.
 The President (interpretation from French): I should like to inform representatives that draft resolution A/49/L.5, entitled Twenty-fifth anniversary of the operations of the United Nations Population Fund has been circulated in the Hall this afternoon and will be considered tomorrow, Thursday, 20 October, in the morning.
 The President (interpretation from French): I call next on the representative of Pakistan, Mr. Jan Ali Junejo.
 This Conference provides us with an opportunity to review the activities of the International Year of the Family and to discuss ways and means of putting together a comprehensive and cohesive programme for follow-up to the Year.
 It therefore has a key role in making or unmaking a society or defining its strengths and weaknesses.
 It is the responsibility of Governments to protect and assist families and to promote their inherent strengths to enable them to function as self-reliant and self-sustaining units in communities and nations.
 The International Bill of Human Rights provides an excellent framework for achieving these objectives.
 The traditional family is the basic unit on which any society rests.
 We should underscore the critical need for the family to receive comprehensive support and protection.
 The Programme of Action adopted by the International Conference on Population and Development has reiterated the importance of the family in society.
 The final document adopted by the human rights Conference addressed individual human rights in the context of family relationships and emphasized the positive role that families can play in the promotion and protection of human rights.
 We should maintain the momentum generated by those Conferences and by the activities held in observance of the International Year of the Family.
 The forthcoming World Summit for Social Development, the United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders and the Fourth World Conference on Women all present valuable opportunities for placing the role of the family in its rightful context.
 We should strengthen the family-related components of the declarations and programmes of action of those conferences.
 At the World Summit for Social Development, we should try to build consensus for generating additional resources to eradicate the poverty and unemployment affecting the poorest families in the world.
 When we look back, we note with satisfaction that observance of the International Year of the Family has achieved considerable progress in enhancing awareness of family issues among Governments and all other actors of civil society.
 During the Year, special attention has been paid to the economic, social and demographic factors affecting families.
 In the developed countries, the civilization of the post-industrial era is searching for appropriate models for the family.
 In the developing countries, the main problem is the survival of the majority of families, who live below the poverty line.
 Constantly changing economic and social structures have thrown up new challenges that are beyond the capacity of traditional systems.
 The families affected need the help of their Governments and of the international community.
 Therefore, it is of the utmost importance that all members of the family women, children, youth, the elderly and disabled persons should be protected from exploitation, violence and abuse.
 Governments, private enterprises, non-governmental organizations and international agencies should formulate and implement family-sensitive policies so that the family may be enabled to act as a medium for promoting healthy values and socio-economic development.
 Mrs. Hoenigsperger (Austria), Vice-President, took the Chair.
 The structural adjustment programmes imposed in the developing countries often result in the retrenchment of essential social services.
 The income-generating capacities of families, which are so crucial, can be strengthened in a stable, progressive and vibrant economic environment.
 The majority of the developing countries, trapped in a vicious circle of heavy debts, dwindling economic assistance, inequitable trade regimes and inadequate investment, cannot hope to ensure better living standards for their families.
 The United Nations, its specialized agencies and the international community should implement national efforts to eradicate illiteracy, provide basic health care and implement population welfare programmes.
 In Bosnia, Palestine, Kashmir, Rwanda, Azerbaijan and many other parts of the world, families have suffered collectively as a result of repression and atrocities.
 In 1994 alone, hundreds of thousands of people were killed; women were raped; children were mutilated and killed; and homes were destroyed.
 Particularly vicious has been the practice of State-sponsored violence against innocent families in order to humiliate and terrorize entire communities. Rape has been used as an instrument of war.
 The Year should have been an occasion to express the international community's strong moral condemnation of these atrocities, but the focus, regrettably, has remained only on stable or quasi-stable societies.
 We urge all Member States, while finalizing specific proposals for the implementation of the follow-up to the Year, to make provisions for the return and rehabilitation of families traumatized and victimized during armed conflicts and civil strife.
 Families in different parts of the world face different impediments in realizing their full potential for development.
 Our experience in Pakistan has been that efforts in the legal, educational and cultural spheres can yield significant results.
 In this context, conscious of the role of women in family structures, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto, has taken a personal interest in putting an end to domestic violence against women.
 As a first step towards the empowerment of women, 25 seats have been reserved for women in the National Assembly of Pakistan, and a specific percentage of government jobs has been earmarked for women.
 The legal protection of women, along with their economic empowerment, can play a significant role in strengthening families.
 Recently, we launched a project to increase the representation of women in the criminal justice administration.
 I must also add that Pakistan, as one of the co-initiators of the World Summit for Children, attaches special importance to the implementation of the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children.
 The International Year of the Family is a significant starting- point for a long-term process.
 When the Year is over, we hope that the family, the essential component of all healthy societies, will not be forgotten by Governments and international agencies.
 Mr. Bayart (Mongolia): We have gathered here to discuss the status of world-wide activities in observance of the International Year of the Family and to set guidelines for further global action in support of families.
 In our view, the high policy-making level of participants is ample evidence of increased public and international awareness of the family issue and of the recognition by the community of nations of its far-reaching importance.
 As we come closer to the end of the International Year of the Family we have a good opportunity to sum up the work already accomplished, identify major challenges that lie ahead and forge the necessary global consensus towards articulating forward-looking strategies for the good of families.
 The observance of the Year should, indeed, lead to a long-term process of integrating a more pronounced family component into both national development strategies and international cooperation.
 National efforts are being complemented by specific measures at the regional and international levels.
 A crucially important contribution was the holding of four regional and interregional preparatory meetings for the Year, which developed specific action-oriented recommendations.
 My delegation wishes to commend the work being done by the secretariat for the International Year of the Family and its Coordinator, Mr. Henryk Sakolski, to set in motion a concerted campaign and provide organizational and substantive support to numerous initiatives around the world.
 An impressive array of non-governmental organizations have throughout been our important partners in the preparation for and observance of the Year.
 Here special mention should in our view be made of the World Forum of non-governmental organizations on launching the International Year of the Family, a major global convocation of non-governmental organizations held in Malta late last year.
 Worldwide, the family has been undergoing constant transformation resulting from social and cultural changes, economic upheavals and the pressures of modernization and development.
 Traditional definitions of family structure based on two major types, nuclear and extended families, are being enriched with the emergence of new family types such as cohabitation, same-gender relationships and single-parent and reorganized families.
 Although such changes differ from country to country, the fundamental function of the family as a basic unit in society remains unchanged.
 And, as such, families provide the fullest reflection of the strengths and weaknesses of the social and developmental welfare environment, thereby offering a uniquely comprehensive human-centred approach to development, and to social issues in particular.
 In this sense, we believe that major upcoming world events such as the Social Summit and the international conferences on women and on human settlements should give due consideration to the family component in formulating their strategies and programmes of action.
 We welcome the opportunity offered by the International Year of the Family to focus attention on the numerous family issues, and in particular on that of vulnerable families.
 It is estimated that one third of all families are now single-parent families where a woman is the sole bread-winner.
 The poverty level of families with disabled members is also high.
 Labour migration to secure a livelihood is frequently a source of family tension and disintegration.
 Families affected by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) require particular attention.
 There is still much to be done to raise awareness of these problems with a view to addressing them adequately.
 With that in view, my delegation believes that the international community should now actively work to formulate a sound follow-up of the Year to sustain its momentum.
 Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 44/82, which proclaimed 1994 the International Year of the Family, the focus of activities for observance of the Year is at the local and national levels.
 National preparatory activities helped to reveal more vividly the existence of acute family-related problems.
 Their predominant causes can be largely ascribed to the upheavals of transition.
 Dismantling of the old system of economic governance, coupled with the abrupt disruption of the external economic and trade environment, resulted in a sharp economic decline, and the emergence of such social evils as poverty and unemployment.
 Aside from the economic sphere, the transition process involves the social, cultural and spiritual life of Mongols, bringing with it other, no lesser challenges, including, inter alia, the deterioration of the social safety net and the educational system.
 Fully aware of the existing situation, the Government of Mongolia is taking bold measures, allocating more than 20 per cent of its budget to human-priority concerns and executing strategies to improve the status of children, women, the aged and other vulnerable groups.
 The President: I call next on the representative of New Zealand, Mr. John McKinnon.
 Mr. McKinnon (New Zealand): The symbol chosen as the logo for the International Year of the Family, a heart sheltered by a roof, is an apt one.
 These activities will help us carry forward the aims of the International Year.
 They will make a difference to family participation in our society.
 New Zealand's participation in the Year has been substantial.
 Prominent New Zealanders active in providing services to families were invited to form this Committee, which worked in liaison with the Department of Social Welfare.
 The Government recognized the importance of the United Nations objectives for the Year in stimulating local, national and international action as part of a sustained long-term effort to increase awareness of family issues and highlight the importance of families.
 Generating awareness was the first, the second was facilitating community activity and the third was information-gathering.
 There is certainly a high level of awareness of the Year in New Zealand.
 It was launched at dawn on 1 January 1994 in Gisborne, the first city in the world to greet the new year and the new day.
 The national theme song for the Year, Good for Life, by a prominent New Zealand band, has become familiar to most of our people.
 The theme statement, The family is good for life, has aided the promotion of the Year, and a related theme is adopted for each month of 1994.
 Research in July suggested that 85 per cent of adults were aware of the International Year.
 Community activity for the Year has been sustained through several initiatives.
 These were prominent New Zealanders involved in promoting the Year nationally and locally.
 Additionally, International Year of the Family coordinators were appointed by local governments.
 It is founded on the Government's concern that families should have appropriate access to effective and coordinated sources of help and advice in times of family crisis.
 Just as important as the Government's input has been the community response to the Year in New Zealand.
 It is this that has made the Year for us.
 Thirty community-initiated projects for the Year have been funded from an allocation by the New Zealand Lottery Grants Board.
 An illustration is a pilot project on parenting skills based on kaupapa Maori, or Maori cultural principles.
 And so, at the conclusion of the International Year of the Family, it is particularly heartening to be able to say that new services are becoming available to families, as well as increased information about existing services.
 Recent policy emphasis on promoting and supporting the role of families in society has been reinforced for the future.
 This includes innovative legislation passed in 1989 for involving extended families in decision-making in child welfare cases.
 We are delighted that Mr. Sakolski will be giving the keynote address at an international conference in Auckland on strengthening families.
 We expect the conference's results to feed directly into Government policy development processes, together with the outcomes of other International Year of the Family initiatives.
 We have also been pleased to be able to contribute internationally to the Year, including through funding several International Year of the Family projects in the South and South-East Asia region.
 Studies relating to literacy in the Jaipur district in India and to the families of street children in the Philippines were two such projects.
 Many differing strengths come from this diversity.
 Building on the basis of such differences is particularly relevant as we move towards 1995, the United Nations Year for Tolerance.
 We have seen the central role of women in development highlighted in the context of the United Nations Conference on Population and Development.
 We will continue to look for emphasis to be placed on the situation of women, children, youth, ageing persons, disabled persons and indigenous people in the context of preparations for the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen next year.
 We firmly believe that there must be a strong focus on the role of the family if the many and complex social issues faced by societies today are to be addressed successfully.
 Let us hope that families in countries that are themselves in crisis will also gradually benefit from the understanding and support of those in more fortunate circumstances.
 The importance of the family to nations' survival cannot be underestimated.
 We salute the international humanitarian agencies engaged in working in these situations, where families are very often disempowered and fragmented.
 We must now work to ensure that the efforts made during 1994 to recognize, support and celebrate the role of the family have a continuing influence on the international social agenda.
 Finally, let me return to the image of the United Nations logo for the Year.
 The roof over the heart can symbolize the shelter given to the individual within his or her family.
 It may also stand for the recognition and support our societies can give to the families within them, with their diverse forms and faces.
 The President: I call next on the Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mr. Mohamed A. Azwai.
 In addition, there has been the impact of economic pressures arising from the dire poverty in which millions of families live in all parts of the world.
 This makes it incumbent upon us not to be content with celebrating but rather to focus on setting up practical programmes for protecting and developing the family and eliminating those threats to its stability and survival.
 We in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya believe that an individual without family has no meaning and no social life and that if human society sinks to the point where men exist and develop outside the family, it will turn into a gathering of lost, uprooted hoboes.
 The unspeakable things we witness nowadays, such as vagrancy, juvenile delinquency, the trade in children, their prostitution, pornography, the spread of drugs and AIDS, are all causes and effects of the disintegration of the family.
 Now the international community has the opportunity afforded by a number of forthcoming international conferences to remedy those grave social ills, particularly during the World Summit on Social Development in Denmark and the World Conference on Women in Beijing next year.
 Libyan legislation therefore contains many laws on the protection of the family.
 All minors whose families have been lost or have disintegrated for any reason, as well as the handicapped, the infirm and the aged, have the right to full social welfare.
 In paragraph 20, it provides that it is one of man's sacred rights to grow up in a family of father, mother and siblings.
 It is truly ironic that while celebrating the year declared by the Assembly as the International Year of the Family, the Libyan family and Libyan society should suffer from international sanctions imposed by one of the organs of this very Organization, namely the Security Council.
 Those sanctions have led to grave human suffering to Libyan families owing to the lack of medicines and of possibilities of treatment, which led to the delay in vaccinating thousands of children and the death of a number of those awaiting permission to go abroad for treatment.
 Entire families have been lost because of road accidents, roads having become the main means of transport in the country.
 All this befell the Libyan family while Libya has been celebrating the International Year of the Family! We appeal to this august Assembly immediately to lift these unjust, unjustifiable sanctions.
 The suffering of the Libyan family came as a result of the political hegemony of certain States on this international Organization.
 They have not stopped there.
 Mrs. Aissatou (Cameroon) (interpretation from French): Speaking on behalf of the Republic of Cameroon at this important International Conference on Families, I am pleased and proud to note that the Conference affords us an opportunity to restore the human person to a central, rightful place in the development process.
 I should also like to join previous speakers in extending very sincere congratulations to the President and other officers of the Conference on their well-deserved election and to assure them of our full cooperation in successfully completing our work.
 Under the Constitution, the State has the duty to protect and promote the family so that it can play a useful part in implementing national population policy, whose ultimate goal is the promotion of a quality population by safeguarding the health of mother and child.
 A study on the Cameroon family carried out in 1988, with the financial support of the World Bank, enabled us to identify the major challenges facing the family in my country.
 The family's role has been enhanced recently by the implementation of structural adjustment programmes, which have been extended to social strata that in 1986 could be said to have risen above the poverty line.
 A second challenge is the breakdown of value systems, a result of the cultural shock created by the conflict between tradition and modernity.
 This is a fundamental problem, gradually becoming more acute with the development of a global culture created by the growth of mass media and modern systems of communication and telecommunication.
 The study, along with others on poverty, has enabled the Cameroon Government to improve its strategy for educating the people on responsible parenting.
 It has also enabled us to target various policies to reduce poverty, to make the family the true foundation of social stability and national integration and to reach a better understanding of the place of women in various development programmes.
 The family code now being drawn up will, when adopted, provide a more solid legal basis for this strategy so that the family in our society will become the special place in which ideals of human development can be formed and take root.
 The United Nations initiative to declare 1994 the International Year of the Family and to organize this Conference on Families only a few months before the Copenhagen World Summit for Social Development has a twofold significance for us.
 On one hand, this initiative strengthens our conviction that all forms of sustainable human development that seek to promote the comprehensive well-being of man and his offspring must necessarily reflect the family as the basic unit of society.
 On the other hand, it strengthens in us the idea that the advancement of family well-being requires the promotion of the various components of the family unit the father, the mother and the child.
 The results of widespread social mobilization around the theme of the family during 1994 and the recommendations of the present Conference on Families are preparing the platform that we should like to see given to the family at the World Summit for Social Development.
 The approach of sustainable human development is today challenging the entire international community.
 A vision of development focusing solely on economics has led to many failures and frustrations and, thereby, demonstrated its limitations.
 From this forum we should welcome the United Nations initiative, undertaken since 1990, to issue the human development index for each country.
 That index, because it is the product of economic and social indicators, is a better reflection of a country's state of development.
 Despite socio-economic difficulties in our countries, families continue to be the last refuge for many of their members a place where those people can still hope to rediscover the meaning of humanity and a real spirit of solidarity.
 We must make it possible for the family to realize its full human potential so that that hope may become a reality.
 The President: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Abdu Hadid, on whom I now call.
 Mr. Abdu Hadid (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): It is a great pleasure for my delegation to see such a host of distinguished representatives celebrating the International Year of the Family.
 When interaction and integration are fully achieved between man's endeavours within the family and man's productivity at work, then we are on the threshold of a new stage of social development.
 First, by creating the appropriate social, economic, legislative and psychological conditions that would enable the family to continue to play its proper role;
 Secondly, by adopting appropriate policies to ensure the cohesion and stability of the family in order for it to interact positively with the objectives of development, while avoiding excessive consumerism;
 Thirdly, by offering more assistance, support and protection to the family, especially in the remote areas, through the provision of high-quality development-oriented social services.
 At the educational level, we have decided to adopt an integrated educational approach, that ensures full interaction between the family itself, school and society, in order to prepare the present generations for the future.
 We have decided also to expand our illiteracy campaigns beyond mere literacy or numeracy, and have focused primarily on parents, in order to eradicate all forms of illiteracy at the educational, social, economic and cultural levels.
 At least one practical lesson per week will focus on the upbringing of children under the supervision of health-care specialists and social workers.
 Efforts will be redoubled towards the formulation of plans that would help families achieve social stability and raise their standards of living through expanded social services, especially in low-income and rural areas.
 Social services provided to various families will be expanded through the creation of new social institutions, consultation and guidance centres.
 The number of nurseries and kindergartens operated by Government and popular institutions is being increased.
 The needs of mothers at home are being provided in order for them to participate more fully in the process of development.
 Appropriate technology in rural areas is introduced at a much larger scale in order to increase agricultural production for local consumption and to improve living standards in the rural areas, thereby improving conditions on the whole.
 At the legislative level, we encouraged more support for the role of the family in solving its own problems, updating national legislation whenever necessary in keeping with social and economic development policies and with an eye to achieving sustainable development.
 We also updated family legislation in Syria in keeping with changed national circumstances, both at the social and economic levels.
 In the area of information, we have focused on the importance of mass media in educating the family and increasing its awareness.
 To this end, we have adopted very clear information policies to protect the family and its members from delinquency.
 The President: I call now on the Permanent Representative of Brazil, Mr. Ronaldo Sardenberg.
 Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): At the outset, I wish to indicate that the delegation of Brazil fully subscribes to the statement made today by the Permanent Representative of Paraguay on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
 Through the ages the family has played a role in the process of socialization and education, the paramount importance of which need not be further emphasized.
 It is not immune to the new economic, social and cultural realities.
 The viability of our societies in the future and the well-being of our descendants will depend on our ability to cope with this process of adaptation directly, so as to avoid a possible trend towards the disintegration of the family structure.
 The role of family life in society is manifold.
 It is at the family level that solutions can be found to many of the social ills of our times.
 Because it is the core structure in society, it retains potential as a fundamental tool in the formulation and implementation of policies in areas such as education, health, and sanitation.
 Given these challenges and possibilities, we consider it entirely appropriate that the international community and the United Nations should devote significant efforts to addressing issues of concern to the family.
 Brazil joined the consensus that resulted in resolution 44/82, launching the International Year of the Family, aimed at promoting increased awareness of family issues and at improving the institutional capability of countries to tackle family-related problems with comprehensive policies.
 Public policies aimed at specific segments of the population cannot fail to consider the concrete living conditions and survival strategies of family groupings, which vary according to their position within the social structure.
 Our Constitution considers the family as the basis of society, and provides for special protection and support by the State.
 The passing of other important pieces of legislation in Brazil also deserve to be mentioned.
 There remains, however, a significant gap between the law and the reality faced by families in Brazil.
 Government and society alike are doing their utmost to bridge this gap in order to allow all families to enjoy the benefits of social and economic development.
 In order to carry out the activities pursuant to the International Year of the Family, an Interministerial Committee was established by President Itamar Franco for the formulation of Brazilian policy on the family.
 In September a debate was conducted in Brasilia on the National Plan for the Brazilian Family.
 The Brazilian National Plan sets the principles and strategies for our national policy in this domain, defining areas of responsibility of the various Ministries.
 The national policy will be coordinated, at the federal level, by a permanent commission composed of 10 Government representatives and 10 representatives of interested non-governmental organizations.
 The main guidelines of this Plan include participation of the family in the formulation, implementation, follow-up and assessment of Government policies and programmes; respect for social and cultural diversity; and the need for appropriate funding at all Government levels to finance activities related to the family.
 The meeting in Brazil was an important preparatory event where topics regarding the economic rights of the family were discussed.
 The International Conference on Population and Development, in which Brazil participated constructively, dedicated one chapter of its Programme of Action to the diversity of family structures and composition and the required socio-economic support.
 Governments should take these realities into consideration when formulating socio-economic development policies, programmes and legislation aiming at contributing to the stability of families.
 Families are increasingly vulnerable.
 The Cairo Programme of Action recommends that Governments should provide the necessary support and protection for these most vulnerable families.
 My Government is committed to implement programmes and actions recommended by the Cairo Conference, and is considering an entire set of measures focused on the family.
 In concluding, I would like to emphasize that the enormous tasks ahead of us concerning family issues must gain proper international attention throughout the United Nations system as well as other institutions, especially those dedicated to the promotion of social and economic development.
 Cardinal Lopez Trujillo (Holy See) (interpretation from Spanish): Thank you very much, Mr. President, for this opportunity that is offered to the Holy See.
 Children are indeed God's most precious gift to marriage.
 It incorporates the principal aspects of and points on the matter, based on a rich conception of fundamental human rights, because the rights of the family are a systematic manifestation and application of the natural law in reference to the family community, the vital foundation of society.
 Pope John Paul II refers to these vital themes in his rich Letter to Families, his gift to the human family on the occasion of this International Year.
 At a recent meeting in Rome with many families from all around the world we were able to verify the deep convergence between the most varied religions regarding the fundamental values of the family.
 It could not be otherwise, for the family is the heritage of mankind through which the future of society on our planet necessarily passes.
 This text, as is well known, was written 350 years before Christ by Aristotle.
 Children are the first victims of instability and erosion.
 They are innocent victims, who have the right to their parents' generous and self-sacrificing love, their example, and an education of which their parents' behaviour is a necessary condition.
 Today all kinds of very high social costs are being paid, either because millions of children do not have families or, as the Pope says, because they are like orphans with living parents.
 In this International Year we are called upon to confirm and implement, as is appropriate and necessary, one fundamental principle: the family based on marriage is a value proper to this natural institution, willed by God, and inscribed in the depths of human nature.
 We have had occasion to observe, on the one hand, what some nations have achieved, and on the other, a systematic emptying of family policies and legislation worthy only of the name in many countries.
 An adequate family policy requires that the family be recognized and helped as a social subject, one that integrates each and every one of its members the man and woman, husband and wife, sons and daughters, babies, youth, the elderly, the healthy and the sick.
 We have been able to work more vigorously for the members of the family who also deserve appropriate assistance of a social nature that is in harmony with, and not in opposition to the family as an integrating body or community.
 If they act in this manner they will be encouraging harmony with the good of the family, society and the common good, which must be ensured for all mankind.
 the family is the basic unit of society and as such should be strengthened.
 It is entitled to receive comprehensive protection and support.
 Marriage must be entered into with the free consent of the intending spouses, and husband and wife should be equal partners.
 That principle must inspire all family policy and any true demographic policy.
 Finally, I transmit the paternal and hopeful greetings to all assembled here and their families from Pope John Paul II, the Pope of the family, the Pope of life.
 The President (interpretation from French): The General Assembly has thus concluded this International Conference on Families devoted to the implementation of the follow-up of the International Year of the Family.
 We hope that this enterprise will be continued.
 The President (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of Australia to introduce the draft resolution contained in document A/49/L.3.
 The basis on which the International Federation is seeking Observer status in the General Assembly is contained in the explanatory memorandum in document A/49/192.
 It acts under its own Constitution with all the rights and obligations of a corporate body with a legal personality.
 Its secretariat is based in Geneva.
 A recent survey established that the member societies of the Federation together represent some 127 million volunteer members, with approximately 270,000 employed staff.
 In accordance with its Constitution, the Federation is the official representative of its member societies in the international field, the guardian of their integrity and the protector of their interests.
 In 1994, programmes coordinated through the International Federation are assisting 19.2 million beneficiaries in Africa, Europe, Asia, the Middle East and the Americas.
 In addition to these emergencies-related programmes, millions of others are assisted through national activities ranging from disaster preparedness, maternal and child health, first aid, women and development, youth and social programmes aimed, in particular, at improving the situation of those who are most vulnerable.
 Moreover, the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement practises a close cooperation between its components both in the field and at the secretariat level.
 The Federation is an international organization composed of member societies, the unique character and mandate of which has been defined, at the national as well as the international level, by nearly all the States that are also the very Members of the United Nations.
 This represents, both in substance and in structure, a unique position in the international community.
 In addition, Federation observer status in the General Assembly would be of mutual benefit to the two organizations and above all to disaster victims, as it would further strengthen the communications and operational cooperation between the United Nations and the Federation.
 The special and unique features outlined above and in the explanatory memorandum and the shared common humanitarian task of the United Nations and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies provide strong justification for according the Federation observer status.
 Mr. Jallow (Gambia): On behalf of the African Group of States and of my own delegation of the Gambia, I have the pleasure to express our support for draft resolution A/49/L.3 on observer status for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in the General Assembly.
 The nature and extent of the Federation's activities, which cover every facet of our lives, either directly or indirectly, have continued to receive international acclaim.
 Sometimes the severity and complexity of the conflict or disaster situation make these tasks not only daunting, but dangerous.
 This notwithstanding, the Federation has continued, guided by its overriding principles of neutrality and impartiality, its uninterrupted service to humankind, bringing its healing powers to the millions of victims maimed and often homeless of wars and natural disasters.
 It is no secret that the Federation is the largest and best-known humanitarian organization in the world, with its 162 member national societies, which their respective Governments find very useful and highly appreciate.
 Since the end of the First World War, the emblem of the Federation has been respected throughout the world for its universality, neutrality, self-sacrifice and ability to prevent and mitigate the sufferings of the weakest, the most vulnerable and victims of every kind of atrocity.
 Admitting the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies to the General Assembly with observer status will be a step forward towards dealing in a more coordinated and thus effective manner with the many humanitarian problems that so often defy the capacity and credibility of our Organization.
 We wish to underline that the Federation fully deserves the status it is seeking.
 As the only international organization with representation by a large majority of Governments and one that is governed by statutes drawn up by Governments and organizations, it fully deserves the status that is being sought on its behalf by more than 120 countries from all regions.
 With this status, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies would be well placed to enhance its collaboration with the United Nations, the United Nations specialized agencies and the United Nations sanctions Committee.
 Granting observer status to the Federation would also facilitate and strengthen its ability to network with target groups in providing urgently needed humanitarian assistance.
 Mr. President, my delegation wishes to record its appreciation of your personal involvement in resolving this issue.
 We recall the problems encountered earlier, and we are happy that a consensus acceptable to all was eventually achieved.
 In conclusion, we would like to join Australia and the other 127 sponsors in commending the draft resolution formally endorsing observer status for the Federation.
 My delegation chairs the Eastern European Group of States this month, which is a great honour for us, but I am speaking here on behalf of my delegation only.
 The Czech Republic is privileged to have co-sponsored draft resolution A/49/L.3, inviting the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies to become a permanent observer in the General Assembly.
 Once that happens, the Federation will have more members than our own United Nations, unless we take great care to adopt somebody else.
 How much more universal can an organization actually be? Statistics about its programme have been listed and mentioned by previous speakers, especially by the representative of Australia, and I will not repeat them.
 We do, however, note that just over half of the total number of people who benefit from the assistance of the Federation are Europeans.
 Whether this is an appropriate proportion is another matter, but being European ourselves, we acknowledge this fact with gratitude.
 We appreciate that observer status should not be available even to worthy organizations as easily as buns in a bakery, to quote a Czech metaphor, but we feel that in this case we are talking about an organization that is not only unique, but truly deserving.
 And if the Federation derives some use from its observer status with us, all the better.
 My delegation is pleased to be among those that have supported and sponsored draft resolution A/49/L.3, which invites the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies to be a permanent observer in the General Assembly.
 We therefore support the views expressed by the representative of Australia in introducing the item today.
 The Red Cross and the Red Crescent have, through their dogged and selfless cooperation at the international level, become well-established symbols of humanitarian assistance in aiding the victims of disasters, in addition to victims of conflict, and assisting the neediest and most vulnerable.
 The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, established 75 years ago, is inspired by the same principles of struggle against human suffering.
 Its present expansion responds to changes in today's world.
 Moreover, the United Nations humanitarian programme includes many matters with which the International Federation is also concerned.
 These points of convergence fully justify observer status for the Federation.
 The President (interpretation from French): Before calling on representatives who wish to speak in explanation of position, may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
 Mr. Rosenstock (United States of America): Had there been a vote on the question of granting observer status in the General Assembly to the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, my delegation would have abstained.
 There is a procedure for establishing relationships between the United Nations and non-governmental organizations.
 The Economic and Social Council may make suitable arrangements for consultation with non-governmental organizations.
 Under that Article, and in compliance with it, a detailed procedure has been established, pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1296 (XLIV).
 The status of observers in the General Assembly should, in accordance with past practice and consistent with the sense of Article 71 of the Charter, be reserved for States and intergovernmental organizations.
 If we continue to depart from that long-standing practice because of intense lobbying by national societies, or in order to respond to a particular organization's desire for what it perceives as equal prestige, we will be departing from the scheme of the Charter.
 It would certainly be regrettable if the rights and privileges accorded to observers representing States and intergovernmental organizations had to be cut back to avoid jeopardizing the work of the Assembly.
 We are pleased that there has been some recognition of these problems.
 We are confident that the Sixth Committee, which has already begun its consideration of this matter, will endorse criteria consistent with the Charter scheme that will allow us to resume a rational handling of these matters.
 The issue is how the United Nations can best recognize the special role of States and intergovernmental organizations and also continue to provide suitable arrangements for consultation with non-governmental organizations.
 Mrs. Horiuchi (Japan): While we joined in the adoption without a vote of draft resolution A/49/L.3, entitled Observer status for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in the General Assembly, we would have abstained had it been put to the vote.
 Our delegation is of the same view as that just offered by the representative of the United States, namely, that, although we highly appreciate the activities of the Federation in the humanitarian field, observer status in the General Assembly should basically be limited to non-Member States and intergovernmental organizations.
 In this context, it should be remembered that the observer status of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was conferred on an exceptional basis because of the ICRC's clear mandate and specific responsibilities under the Geneva Conventions.
 We hope that such criteria will be devised before we consider granting observer status to any other non-governmental organization.
 The President (interpretation from French): In accordance with resolution 45/6 of 16 October 1990, I call on the observer for the International Committee of the Red Cross.
 As founder of the Red Cross and Red Crescent movement, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which was granted observer status four years ago, warmly welcomes this decision, which pays tribute to the humanitarian activities carried out by the Federation over the past 75 years.
 Since its creation at the time of the Paris Peace Conference following the First World War, the Federation has steadily developed its assistance to victims of natural and technological disasters as well as to refugees and other civilians outside conflict areas.
 It has also invested great efforts in developing national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, whose humanitarian network covers practically all countries in the world today.
 Its new status will strengthen the relationship and cooperation between the Federation and the entire United Nations system and will allow the Federation to be, within the General Assembly, an advocate for the victims of natural disasters, epidemics, hunger, poverty and underdevelopment in short, the most needy and vulnerable.
 The President (interpretation from French): When this morning's meeting was called to order eight out of 184 delegations were represented in the Hall; this afternoon when we began at 3.10 p.m. there were 46 representatives present.
 Tomorrow morning's meeting will begin at 10 a.m. Many speakers are scheduled to speak and I hope that representatives will be in their places at 10 o'clock.
 The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.
 It is therefore only fitting that we congratulate ourselves on the positive results of that Conference.
 Here, I should like to congratulate all the delegations that participated in it and that spared no effort to achieve the results attained.
 In this connection, President Mubarak, his Government and the people of the Arab Republic of Egypt, who did all in their power to make the Conference a success, deserve our heartfelt thanks and gratitude.
 I would also take this opportunity to pay a well-earned tribute to the United Nations Population Fund and its Executive Director, Mrs. Nafis Sadik, not only for her work on the Cairo Conference but also for her constant efforts to find solutions to demographic problems throughout the world.
 Over the past 25 years, under the direction of the Economic and Social Council and its Executive Board, the Fund has carried out its mandate with resolve, and the results achieved demonstrate the success of its work.
 Indeed, in 1969, there was little awareness of demographic questions and their impact on economic and social development and human welfare, and few developing countries had a national programme dealing with population questions.
 Thus the role of the demographic factor in the evolution of economic and social development was greatly underestimated.
 The Cairo Conference has just demonstrated that the demographic factor has become a key element in all debates, programmes and action in the field of development.
 The success of the International Conference on Population and Development that was held recently in Cairo will undoubtedly help to reinforce our efforts in the quest for an integrated approach to development - an approach that makes population programmes and policies a fundamental element in the population development equation.
 But these results, encouraging as they are, should not make us lose sight of the fact that the road we still have to travel is long and full of ambushes.
 Although, in absolute terms, the birth rate has gone down, the annual increases in world population are greater than anything seen in the past.
 Such action is essential if we are to safeguard what has been achieved over the past 25 years.
 In these circumstances, the Programme of Action that was adopted in Cairo is a sound basis and a useful tool for optimizing the efforts of the international community.
 By adopting this Programme the international community, for the first time, went beyond demographic targets and made the individual and the family the very focus of development activities and programmes.
 In so doing, it recognized that investment in the individual - in his health and education - is the key to sustainable economic growth and sustainable development as a whole.
 This was the sense of my opening message at the International Conference on Families in October 1994.
 None the less, I should like to remind people that if the adoption of the Programme of Action itself was essential, its implementation is vital.
 Therefore, before concluding, I should like to call upon Governments to do everything they can to translate into action the Programme of Action that we adopted in Cairo.
 In this connection, our support for the activities of UNFPA should be further strengthened.
 "global partnership, to improve the human environment, to defuse the population explosion, and to supply the required momentum to development efforts."
 Out of U Thant's concern, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) was born.
 Now, 25 years later, it has operations in 140 countries; more than 100 countries make contributions to its work; it operates field offices in 58 countries; and it employs a total of 837 staff members.
 It is a time to recognize the importance of the work of UNFPA.
 That work involves both formulating and implementing programmes for population planning.
 It is also challenging.
 It demands perseverance, patience and commitment.
 It has earned the gratitude and the respect of the international community.
 I should like now to consider why the work of UNFPA is so crucial; to review some of its accomplishments; and to outline our hopes for the future, along with the challenges we must face.
 We work to maintain and establish peace.
 But we cannot attain our objective of a stable and prosperous world if the goalposts are moved down the field.
 The infrastructure on which our solutions are based depends on the size of our population.
 Our work towards such important aims as human rights, sustainable development, international trade and liveable cities cannot succeed if the increase in the number of the world's inhabitants becomes unbearable.
 Today, there is a real risk of such a tragedy.
 Global population has experienced runaway growth in recent years.
 From 1950 to 1990, it more than doubled in size.
 Currently, the world's population exceeds 5.5 billion, and almost 80 per cent live in the least-developed regions.
 Our projections show that the global population could more than double again by the year 2050, with the biggest increases in the developing countries.
 The international community has long understood that this trend presents a threat to stability.
 Thus, in 1947 - just two years after the United Nations came into being - the Population Commission was established.
 It was to track the growth of populations and provide other demographic information.
 The UNFPA became operational in 1969 - three years after the General Assembly authorized the United Nations to provide technical assistance relating to population.
 Supported through voluntary contributions, the Fund is now the largest internationally funded provider of population assistance to developing countries.
 Last year it approved 480 projects, for a total cost of $72 million.
 The Fund's purpose is to help set up population planning programmes around the globe, and to provide financial assistance for their implementation.
 But it recognizes the broad social implications of its work.
 The Fund engages in other activities to further the implementation of population policies.
 These include work on census and civil registration; research in many fields; and information, communication and education.
 Particularly under the leadership of its current executive director, Mrs. Nafis Sadik, the UNFPA has focused on the empowerment of women.
 Over the past 25 years, the Fund has benefited from exceptional leadership - first, by the late Mr. Rafael Salas, and, since 1987, by Mrs. Sadik.
 They have provided excellent service to the United Nations.
 The Fund is uniquely situated to promote population policies.
 They have provided essential help to the United Nations in its efforts to encourage global policies on population.
 At the 1974 World Population Conference, held in Bucharest, the international community adopted a World Plan of Action.
 It recognized the link between population and economic and social development.
 Most recently the UNFPA played a major role in organizing the International Conference on Population and Development, held this September in Cairo.
 Mrs. Sadik was Secretary-General of the Conference.
 Almost 180 countries joined with non-governmental organizations at the Conference to discuss how to balance population growth and sustainable development.
 And in six days the representatives of many disparate cultures succeeded in adopting a Programme of Action, which maps out a strategy for the next 20 years.
 Afterwards, Mrs. Sadik said that the Programme of Action adopted in Cairo "starts from the reality of the world we live in, and shows us the path to a better reality."
 Through specific goals, spanning issues from education to reproductive health to family planning, the international community charted a path that could lead the world away from environmental and social disasters.
 Such conferences have promoted awareness.
 Only political will, backed by financial resources, can give life to them.
 That is why the UNFPA's role will continue to be important, and to be challenging.
 The Fund must continue to encourage societies to develop population policies.
 Fundamental questions will be asked here.
 They may arouse concern.
 The UNFPA must be prepared for controversy.
 It is vital that in this enterprise we have the help of able and active programmes such as the UNFPA.
 The President: (interpretation from French): At the request of the Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund and following consultations with regional groups, I would now authorize, as an exceptional measure, the Chairman of the Group of 77 to speak on behalf of the Group of 77.
 Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from French): I understand that the Chairman of the Group of 77 can speak in that capacity only by way of an exception.
 The mandate of the Fund as established by the Economic and Social Council in 1973 and reaffirmed by that same body in 1986, has not lost any of its relevance today despite the amount of time that has passed.
 On the contrary, the mandate has become more pertinent and relevant than ever before.
 Any anniversary is a propitious opportunity to take stock of what has been achieved so far and start to think about what needs to be done to build for a sound future.
 In this connection I wish to emphasize the very significant contribution made by the Fund to strengthening the efforts of our countries by its presence at their side and helping with everything they have done to cope with population problems.
 The Group of 77 and China welcome the efforts made by the Fund that have greatly assisted in reducing infant and maternal mortality rates, particularly in the developing world, as well as its efforts towards promoting the almost universal use of family planning programmes and improving life expectancy rates.
 The success of the work of the International Conference on Population and Development held in Cairo from 5 to 13 September this year, and the preparatory process relating to that Conference, is also a credit to UNFPA, the backbone of the organization of that world meeting.
 That achievement alone would place this action of the Fund among the most signal efforts made by the United Nations to articulate international cooperation for development.
 For the future, the ambitious Programme of Action adopted by the Cairo Conference, the qualitative and quantitative targets of which cover the next 20 years, should be the new focus of interest of UNFPA.
 The present session of the General Assembly provides us with an excellent occasion to initiate this exercise.
 Being mindful of these parameters is more than ever the best possible guarantee for fruitful cooperation between the Fund and all the beneficiary countries in the developing world.
 Our congratulations are extended equally to all the members of her dynamic team, who through their labours have been able to make sure that UNFPA is equal to the challenges of the complex population problems.
 It will be understood therefore that the delegations of the countries members of the Group of 77, and of China, are particularly happy, through Algeria's signature, to sponsor the draft resolution celebrating this important event.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on the representative of the Gambia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
 Mr. Jallow (Gambia): The Gambia as Chairman of the African Group for this month is greatly honoured to address this Assembly on behalf of the African Group on the occasion of the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the operations of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
 Since you are a distinguished son of Africa dedicated to the service of common humanity, we are convinced you will bring to your high office the wealth of knowledge and rich experience that has characterized your selfless service to your country and Africa.
 Already, your laudable efforts to guide and enrich the proceedings of the forty-ninth session are beginning to be felt in all aspects of our work.
 Indeed, it is a clear indication of the immense success that will eventually crown the work of this session.
 The African Group feels it is appropriate to support fully the congratulatory draft resolution before the General Assembly and hopes that it will be adopted by consensus.
 The celebration of this silver anniversary is taking place at a historic period in the annals of world population activities, particularly the just-concluded International Conference on Population and Development held in Cairo.
 The Programme of Action adopted by the Conference will serve as a guidepost for bringing together the interrelated issues of population, sustained economic growth and development, and the environment, all of which are of great concern to the international community.
 The effects of this imbalance are felt in the areas of health care, housing, schooling, employment, and food security, among other pressing needs.
 We in Africa are mindful of the fact that efforts to enhance economic performance, provide social services and maintain social order and political stability continue to be eroded, with painful consequences in some cases, by population pressures.
 At Cairo, Africa joined the other regions of the world in focusing on the problems of population and development and arriving at a consensus for international action.
 Indeed, the world saw the willingness and the commitment of Governments and grass-roots organizations to come together to play a crucial and catalytic role in moving the cause of social development forward into the next century.
 Africa is a priority region for population assistance, as is attested to by the depth and breadth of population programmes being assisted by UNFPA.
 Such assistance at the country level should continue, and should be further intensified in the aftermath of the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development.
 The relationship between population and social and economic development and the need to formulate and implement a national population policy to address the issues involved are being given more urgency and importance.
 Together with UNFPA, and in light of the Programme of Action of the Cairo Conference, African Governments are looking forward to international collaboration to develop and implement that Programme of Action.
 We should also provide support to help improve the social, economic, health and political status of women.
 In recognition of the challenges ahead, UNFPA has been forging partnerships with African regional organizations such as the Organization of African Unity for increased political support and the Economic Commission for Africa and the African Development Bank for an increased resource base for population activities.
 UNFPA has also actively sought to identify viable non-governmental organizations that can participate in population and development activities at the country level.
 More resources would be required to meet the challenge of the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development.
 I therefore call on all African Governments to continue their support for the population cause and to UNFPA.
 In concluding, I should like once more to express the African Group's congratulations to UNFPA on its achievements during the past 25 years and to express our support for its programmes in the years ahead.
 The Asia Pacific region contains six of the 10 most populous countries in the world.
 Stretching over nine time zones from Azerbaijan in the west to my own country, Samoa, in the east, this region can be proud of many achievements, from the green revolution to industrial development.
 Since becoming fully operational in 1969, the UNFPA has accumulated a quarter century of experience in formulating and implementing population policies and programmes.
 As the world's largest multilateral population agency, the Fund is in a unique position to assess opportunities and identify solutions for the smooth and effective functioning of population programmes.
 Over the years, in collaboration with and at the request of Governments in developing countries, including many in the Asian region, UNFPA-funded programmes have made advances in increasing awareness of and appreciation for population dynamics and their global implications.
 UNFPA has always recognized that population activities are multisectoral, with core activities such as family planning and data collection and analysis, as well as the formation of population policy, educational programmes, the provision of vital information and communication.
 The improvement of women's health and education, and concern for the environment are also key core activities.
 Regional assistance has been provided in cooperation and collaboration with the relevant subregional organizations: the Association of South-East Asian Nations, the South Pacific Commission, the South Pacific Forum, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and the Economic Cooperation Organization.
 The overall assistance provided by UNFPA to the Asia region since 1969 amounts to some $869 million.
 Since the 1974 World Population Conference, the International Conference on Population in 1984, the International Forum on Population in the Twenty-First Century in 1989 and this year's International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo, a quantum leap has truly been achieved.
 Rapid population growth and unbalanced distribution pose serious challenges to sustainable development and prosperity in the coming decades.
 Governments face critical pressures in trying to feed, house and educate their population while at the same trying to provide adequate services to rural and growing urban areas.
 At the individual level, reproductive health and family planning are essential needs.
 The region's challenges include achieving a better balance between population growth and its resource base; providing jobs in growing urban areas; increasing awareness of and overcoming obstacles in environmental protection; and improving the status of women.
 But greater challenges lie ahead, and we in the Asian Group are confident that UNFPA, with the assistance of the international community, will continue to provide dynamic leadership as it has done in the past to implement the Programme of Action adopted recently at the Cairo Conference.
 The successful outcome of the Cairo Conference on Population and Development surely attests to the skilful manner and active role played by UNFPA and the Conference secretariat in guiding and promoting the new global population agenda in the context of sustainable development.
 The objective now for the Fund and indeed for the international community is fully to implement the Programme of Action agreed to in Cairo.
 We wish Mrs. Sadik and UNFPA well in their efforts for the tasks ahead.
 It turns out that, at this moment, not very many of UNFPA's programmes are operating in countries of the region I am representing here today, and one might well ask whether this indicates that the region is not facing any problems.
 On the one hand, in several parts of the Eastern European region, abortion has been used in essence as a form of contraception, on demand and with hardly any limitations.
 On the other hand, there were other parts of the Eastern European region in which population growth was promoted at any cost, whatever the effect on the resulting thousands of unwanted babies.
 Consequently, as I said, hardly can it be said that the region has been spared any problems.
 For the Eastern European region, the important perspective is not only the linkage between population policies and economic development, but also - and perhaps even more so - the linkage between population policies and the devastated ecology of many areas in our region.
 On this occasion, therefore, we look forward to an even closer cooperation of our countries with the UNFPA so that we can garner the full benefits of the experience UNFPA has accumulated over the past quarter century.
 Meanwhile, however, we find it absolutely proper and correct that the UNFPA should be focusing in particular on the most vulnerable and most disadvantaged parts of the world.
 UNFPA's most recent achievement, of course, was the Cairo Conference.
 In our opinion, the controversies that were part and parcel of that Conference are a healthy sign that the Conference was grappling with live issues that concern every country - indeed, every family.
 In our view, the Plan of Action adopted in Cairo should be considered as a minimum programme to be implemented, especially as it concerns the advancement of women, the quality and extent of health care and family care of children, and the quality of education.
 My delegation and the countries of the region I am representing here today appreciate tremendously the work of UNFPA's Executive Director, Mrs. Sadik.
 Her leadership no doubt contributes to the effectiveness of the UNFPA, and, on behalf of my regional group, I should like to extend my congratulations to her and to all her colleagues - and happy birthday, UNFPA.
 The President (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of Paraguay, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
 The Group of Latin American and Caribbean States considers appropriate and supports the commemorative draft resolution introduced before the General Assembly.
 Ever since its inception, the Population Fund has provided, at the request of their Governments, assistance to the countries of our region in a broad range of priority programmes and in strengthening their national capacity in population matters.
 Almost $380 million of its regular funds have been made available to the region through the Fund ever since the start-up of its operations, and around $23 million in additional funds has been mobilized, on a multilateral and bilateral basis, over the same period.
 The Fund has always recognized the multisectoral nature of population assistance, and thus it has been able to meet the needs of the countries of our region despite their very different population situations and problems.
 This policy must be pursued and expanded.
 That kind of support - attuned to the diversity in cultures and differing perceptions as well as to the role of moral and religious values - must be at the heart of all the Fund does.
 We consider important the establishment of the new system of technical assistance to countries, which is based in Santiago de Chile and involves a support team that includes 12 advisers.
 These programmes have contributed to advancing knowledge of the workings of demographics, its determining factors and its implications.
 On this occasion we must also refer to the International Conference on Population and Development, which took place in Cairo last month.
 These strides notwithstanding, serious problems remain in the region that affect in particular the poorest segments of the population: the fertility rate of adolescents has not shown the same degree of change as that of other age groups, and maternal mortality continues at unacceptably high levels.
 Access on the part of the poor to information and quality services in terms of reproductive health and family planning is limited, and a great deal remains to be learned about interrelationships between population, sustainable development and the environment so that appropriate programmes and policies can be designed.
 Policies aimed at decentralizing public spending and social services require an increased capacity for analysis and greater operational capability at the local and municipal levels.
 The preparation of national reports on population led to a careful analysis of each national situation and in most of the countries grew out of a broad nationwide consultation process that included Governments, non-governmental organizations and various other groups of civil society.
 By the same token, this spirit of participation and inclusion was manifest in the make-up of the national delegations to the Cairo Conference.
 Mrs. Fr\x{5db0}hette (Canada): On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States, I am happy to join previous speakers in congratulating the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) on the occasion of its twenty-fifth anniversary.
 Over the last 25 years we have all come to know much more about the dynamics of population and its importance to development.
 Much of what we have learned is thanks to the efforts of UNFPA.
 The mandate of UNFPA, as originally defined and later reaffirmed in 1986, calls on the Fund to assume a leading role in promoting population programmes, building awareness of population issues and developing the capacity of countries to respond to their particular needs in population and family planning.
 It has been particularly effective in establishing the population field as a critical development issue.
 This has been clearly demonstrated by the extremely rapid growth of global interest in and demand for population programmes.
 UNFPA programmes encourage activities aimed at improving the quality of family planning services and enhancing their social acceptability and effectiveness.
 Using such methods as country support teams, the Fund formulates population education activities and helps design projects for the special needs of women, adolescents and indigenous communities.
 By helping to improve women's health, education and economic opportunities, the Fund has contributed to important development goals, as well as having had an effect on population growth.
 Before closing, I would like to acknowledge with appreciation the dedication of the UNFPA staff and their most valuable contribution to the work and success of the Fund.
 We are particularly pleased to note that under her leadership UNFPA's focus on women has extended to her own staff, where 44 per cent of professional positions are held by women.
 This is one of the highest percentages among United Nations agencies and organizations, and speaks well of UNFPA's capacity to practise what it preaches.
 On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States, I again congratulate UNFPA on its twenty-fifth anniversary, and express our deepest gratitude to its dedicated staff and volunteers.
 Ms. Oakley (United States of America): My delegation, as the delegation of the host country, is pleased to be here today on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
 Since its creation UNFPA has been the world's leading multilateral force in the family planning and reproductive health field.
 Most important to UNFPA's success over the last 25 years has been its strong and dynamic management.
 From the early years, under the leadership of Rafael Salas, to the present, under the courageous and sure hand of Mrs. Nafis Sadik, UNFPA has grown stronger, more capable and increasingly effective.
 Over these 25 years tremendous changes have occurred in both the scope and the prevalence of national and international policies dealing with population and reproductive health.
 In addition to this dramatic change in prevalence, we all recognize the significant change in scope these policies have undergone.
 Nowhere was this change more evident than during preparations for the very successful International Conference on Population and Development.
 Population issues are now recognized as having a much broader influence on development overall and as being much more broadly influenced by other societal factors.
 A significant achievement of UNFPA has been its role in establishing national population coordination units.
 These units have increased both the visibility of population issues and the implementation of national programmes to address them.
 UNFPA has also been key to the inclusion of population issues within many nations' development planning processes.
 Incorporation of population as a key variable within the complex development equation is critical to efforts to maintain the attention of policy makers.
 We also recognize and applaud the impact UNFPA has had over the last 25 years in the world-wide expansion of services and information.
 UNFPA has contributed greatly to the significant expansion in world-wide access to maternal and child health and family planning services, as well as the vast increases in information, education and communication.
 More recently UNFPA has promoted an increased understanding of the critical role women play in advancing and addressing population issues as well as their key role in national development.
 The culmination of many of these activities was, of course, the recent International Conference on Population and Development, held in Cairo.
 The tremendous success of this historic conference is testimony to the years of preparation and hard work that went into this undertaking.
 At the Conference an unprecedented number of nations reached consensus on a visionary Programme of Action to address the issues associated with rapid population growth, quality of life and sustainable development.
 The Programme of Action recognizes the interrelationships between population and development and calls for a new comprehensive approach to address population and related development issues.
 It acknowledges that both rapid population growth and wasteful consumption patterns play major roles in environmental degradation.
 The Programme of Action provides concrete estimates of financial resource requirements for implementing the new comprehensive approach.
 Although these resource requirements are substantial, they are both attainable and worthy of our support.
 The return on the world's investment in these programmes will be a better life for all its people.
 One of the most important outcomes of the Conference is that it has focused the world's attention on the urgency of addressing population issues.
 We have the knowledge, skill and technology needed to address these issues.
 The Cairo Conference demonstrated that we also have the political will.
 Success is within our grasp.
 Now is the time to act.
 Yet, while the Cairo Programme of Action reflects consensus among nations and will be implemented according to nations' own laws and traditions, the document also acknowledges the deeply personal nature of reproductive decisions.
 These decisions profoundly affect the lives of individual people, particularly women.
 A central theme of the new comprehensive approach is the critical role that women must play in reproductive decision-making and the development of nations.
 The education, empowerment and equality of women are key components of improving the lives of people in all nations.
 The right to choose the number and spacing of one's children freely and responsibly has been recognized internationally for more than 20 years and was reaffirmed at Cairo.
 The Programme of Action emphasizes the importance of ensuring that quality, voluntary family planning and reproductive health information and services are universally available so that all the world's people can exercise this right.
 Here again, we are looking to the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) for leadership.
 Implementation of the comprehensive approach will require better coordination among United Nations agencies.
 UNFPA will lead in the effort to develop a coordinated action plan for follow-up clearly outlining each agency's role and avoiding unnecessary duplication.
 We also wish to underscore the importance of an assessment by UNFPA and all donors as to how approaches to population assistance should be modified to take into account the comprehensive plan.
 A critical new area that I believe UNFPA must address is the reproductive health needs of refugee women.
 Of course, successful action in this regard and on the Cairo recommendations as a whole will be possible only if there is a substantial increase in available funding from all sources, including multilateral and bilateral donors, recipient countries and the private sector.
 My delegation wholeheartedly supports efforts to implement the recommendations of the Programme of Action.
 We are examining population issues within the United States to ensure that our own programmes are consistent with the international consensus.
 We also look forward to working in partnership with other nations and multilateral organizations in undertaking these critical programmes.
 Our commitment reflects both the importance of its work and the high esteem in which we hold the Organization.
 The past 25 years of have been a wonderful beginning.
 Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): It is an honour for me to address the Assembly today on behalf of the European Union and Austria on the very special occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
 An institution which started its operations a quarter of a century ago has matured.
 It began with a simple trust fund.
 In 1972 the General Assembly changed the character of UNFPA into a fund established under the authority of the General Assembly and placed it under the governing body of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), by duly taking into account the separate identity of UNFPA.
 Subsequently, the Economic and Social Council played a major role in defining the aims and the purposes of the Fund, including the establishment of general principles to be applied for the allocation of resources.
 In 1987 the name was changed to United Nations Population Fund.
 This all has proved to be a very solid basis.
 UNFPA has developed over the time into one of the most important players in the field of multilateral population and development assistance.
 The Fund's first Executive Director, Rafael Salas, laid the basis for UNFPA and influenced to a very high degree its the scope and development for 18 years, until his death in 1987.
 He is to be praised and remembered as the spiritual founding father.
 The fact that this Fund has for many years now been the fastest growing institution in the United Nations system is eloquent testimony to his important contribution.
 An institution depends on motivated and committed staff at all levels.
 The staff of UNFPA have consistently performed exceptionally over the last 25 years, often in difficult circumstances.
 We would like to congratulate all of them today and to wish them well in their future work.
 An institution depends on outstanding leadership.
 I trust that today is a happy day for Mrs. Sadik.
 She is the first woman in the United Nations system to head a major fund or programme.
 She and UNFPA have broken the ground.
 Today, four United Nations organizations are headed by professional women.
 Since 1969 UNFPA has provided close to $3 billion in population assistance to virtually every developing country.
 As the Assembly knows, the States members of the European Union together with other European countries provided two-thirds of the voluntary contributions in 1993.
 We will continue to provide strong support to UNFPA and its activities in the future.
 UNFPA played a significant role in ensuring the success of the International Conference on Population and Development.
 Let me assure the Assembly that the European Union will do all it can to fulfil the commitments made in Cairo.
 In conclusion, it has always been a privilege and a pleasure to work closely with our friends and colleagues in UNFPA.
 We wish them well on this special day and look forward to continuing close cooperation with them in the future.
 We trust that the draft resolution commemorating this anniversary will be adopted by acclamation.
 Mr. Ansari (India): It is a pleasure and an honour for my country to participate in today's commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the operations of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
 The success of the International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo last month is proof of the competence with which the UNFPA has fulfilled this mandate.
 While most of the credit for this goes to the countries themselves, the UNFPA has certainly been an important catalyst in this process, especially in the areas of creation of awareness, policy and programme formulation, data collection and analysis, and capacity-building.
 The UNFPA is the largest internationally funded source of population assistance.
 By mid-1994 it had provided a total of nearly $3 billion to more than 141 countries globally.
 The role of the UNFPA has, for me, an understandably special significance, as its long-standing cooperation with my own country, India, in the area of family planning and training of staff, dates back to 1974.
 The current UNFPA programme is the fourth in my country and the Fund's largest.
 It gives me particular pleasure, therefore, to join this commemorative process today.
 The Cairo Programme of Action of September 1994 crystallizes several decades of national and international experience in the field of population and development.
 It must be refined and elaborated at the social Summit in Copenhagen, the women's Conference in Beijing and Habitat II in Istanbul, and it must be further strengthened and focused through the United Nations Agenda for Development.
 UNFPA has a major role to play in that process, in close collaboration with its development partners within the United Nations development system and in keeping with the principles of multilateralism.
 The past two years have witnessed remarkable changes in the United Nations.
 We have adopted resolutions to greatly strengthen the operational activities of the United Nations development system and to revitalize and restructure the United Nations in economic, social and related fields.
 That, and other experience, has convinced me that the United Nations system can and must play a lead role in helping build that path to a better reality.
 Twenty-five years of competent functioning by the United Nations Population Fund clearly emphasizes the need for the Fund to play an integral role in this cooperative process.
 Mr. Birn Lian (Norway): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Sweden and Norway.
 One very clear indication of the respect the Fund commands is the increase in voluntary contributions over the years.
 The Fund has succeeded in responding to these needs with a variety of policy and operational approaches.
 Evaluations that have been made tell us that recipient Governments have a positive attitude towards UNFPA's overall contributions and that they perceive UNFPA as a capable and reliable partner.
 Flexibility and adaptability in relation to individual countries' situations have become a trademark of the Fund's operations.
 The impact of the activities of the Fund has been felt in several areas, of which I would like on this occasion to mention three.
 First, through information and dialogue, the UNFPA has successfully promoted the importance of population as a critical issue in development.
 Fresh in everybody's minds is UNFPA's excellent contribution to and leadership in the International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo.
 Thirdly, UNFPA has played an important role in building institutional capacity in many countries.
 However, since no organization is ever perfect, there is necessarily room for improvement in a number of areas.
 There is, for instance, a need to improve the quality of programmes and projects, capacity-building and programme sustainability.
 One such lesson, which UNFPA has already taken steps to address, is the need to reorient traditional family planning policies towards more integrated reproductive health care policies.
 In this respect the International Conference on Population and Development represents an important and historic breakthrough.
 A second key lesson is that population and development programmes are most effective when steps simultaneously have been taken to improve the status of women.
 UNFPA has helped to raise awareness about the role of women and that women must be at the centre of the reproductive health care process; women must therefore be fully involved in the decision-making process, both within society and within the family.
 These and other telling lessons constitute important parts of the Programme of Action adopted by the Cairo Conference.
 That Programme, formulated in a spirit of consensus and international cooperation, provides a solid platform for meeting the challenges ahead.
 The Nordic countries have traditionally given high priority to the work of the Fund, and together we constitute a group of major donors to UNFPA.
 Combined, the Nordic allocations to the Fund amount to about 30 percent of total pledges in 1993.
 That testifies to our support for the activities of the Fund.
 The Nordic countries are therefore looking forward to working in close partnership with UNFPA under the skilful and inspiring leadership of Mrs. Sadik in implementing the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development.
 The President (interpretation from French): I now call on Mr. Sher Afgan Khan of Pakistan, in his capacity as Chairman of the Second Committee.
 Mr. Khan (Pakistan) Chairman of the Second Committee: It is a pleasure and an honour for me, as Chairman of the Second Committee, to participate in today's commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the operations of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
 It has provided guidance to the Fund throughout its 25 years of operations and has watched with considerable admiration as the Fund evolved from a small trust fund into the dynamic organization that it is today.
 When UNFPA began operations one score and five years ago, it had a tiny staff and less than $3 million in voluntary contributions to work with.
 Two years later, this had grown to $24 million and by the end of the third year, to $40 million.
 Its subsequent growth has been equally impressive, reaching $129 million by the beginning of the second decade of its existence and passing the $216 million mark 10 years later.
 And it is in Asia where UNFPA has arguably had its greatest impact and realized its greatest success.
 Indeed, many Asian countries now have fourth- or fifth-generation population policies and programmes, and quite a few are sharing their experiences with other developing countries through South-South cooperation arrangements.
 That journey, however, has not always been a smooth one.
 The Economic and Social Council has thus made the promotion of awareness, in both developed and developing countries, one of the Fund's main aims and purposes.
 It is also why the multinational approach of UNFPA - being neutral and universal - has been so effective in building up knowledge and understanding of population issues and in promoting the formulation of population policies and programmes among a diverse group of countries the world over.
 A little more than a month ago, at the International Conference on Population and Development, some 170 countries adopted the historic Cairo Programme of Action. The Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mrs. Benazir Bhutto, was a distinguished participant in the Cairo Conference.
 Through her outstanding declaration in terms of moral, ethical and political principles, as well as commitments to action, she made a major contribution to the success of that Conference.
 It places women and men and their families at the top of the international development agenda.
 It puts people first and brings women into the mainstream of development.
 The Programme of Action, of course, was crafted by the countries of the world, but the acceptance and endorsement of many of these issues owe much to the operations of UNFPA over the past 25 years.
 As Chairman of the Second Committee, Pakistan is eager to work with all the delegations on the implications of the historic and outstanding International Conference on Population and Development.
 Our long association with the Fund dates back to 1970, when we signed our first country agreement with UNFPA for support for our national family-planning programme.
 Indeed, my country is proud to have been one of the Fund's first cooperating partners.
 UNFPA's work in Pakistan is also a reflection of the relevance of its activities to the development efforts of countries.
 The Fund supports our efforts to expand dramatically the coverage of family-planning services among couples of reproductive age, especially in rural areas; to integrate family-planning services into all health outlets; and to recruit and train thousands of family-planning field workers to provide door-to-door family-planning services to the rural population.
 The nearly 25 years of cooperation between UNFPA and Pakistan are testimony to the manifold advantages of multilateral assistance and, more specifically, to the lead role UNFPA plays within the United Nations system in providing such assistance in the field of population.
 It shows as well that multilateral assistance can be effectively tailored to the policies and priorities of a country's development strategy.
 Thus, when we commemorate 25 years of UNFPA operations, we are also in essence celebrating the principles and practices of multilateralism.
 We therefore strongly feel that by adopting a congratulatory draft resolution commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of UNFPA's operations we will be reaffirming not only our commitment to multilateralism but also our confidence that UNFPA remains the lead agency within the United Nations system to address population issues.
 The people and Government of Pakistan deeply appreciate the role of the UNFPA.
 We hold its Executive Director, Mrs. Nafis Sadik, in very high esteem and admire her for her clear vision, professional excellence and dynamic leadership of the Fund.
 Our deep appreciation is also due to UNFPA's dedicated staff for their hard work and commitment to making the world a better place in which to live.
 The UNFPA has come a long way in its efforts to address the population issue, which is of such vital importance to the entire international community.
 Today, the UNFPA is responsible for about one third of all population assistance to developing countries, assistance that has made it possible for many of those countries to successfully formulate and implement their programmes.
 The adoption of the Programme of Action at the International Conference on Population and Development at Cairo was a milestone in our joint efforts to address the population issue.
 Formulated on the basis of past experience, the Programme of Action calls for a holistic approach, one that works for progress on a wide range of fronts, including reproductive health/rights, gender equity, poverty alleviation, and the environment.
 It is a clear set of guidelines for the future.
 Japan believes that the UNFPA must continue to play a major role in assisting countries in implementing the Programme of Action.
 It accordingly pledges its full support to the Fund, and towards the same end it wishes to propose that the draft resolution be adopted by consensus.
 I should like to announce that the following countries have also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Ce d'Ivoire.
 The President (interpretation from French): I declare closed the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the operations of the United Nations Population Fund.
 We offer Mrs. Sadik our encouragement as she continues her work for the benefit of all mankind.
 The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.
 In this connection, I would remind members of another decision taken by the Assembly at the same meeting: that speakers in the general debate, after delivering their statements, should leave the General Assembly Hall through room GA-200, located behind the podium, before returning to their seats.
 Transformation does not have a fixed, inexorable course.
 We must not allow ourselves to be enticed by hasty interpretations or by mere appearances.
 It is our responsibility to give meaning to change and to guide trends in accordance with the greater interests of the world community.
 Nuclear war has ceased to be an impending threat.
 Conflicts which many of us judged insoluble either have been or are in the process of being settled through dialogue and negotiation.
 In Central America and in South-East Asia, progress is tangible.
 It is that very logic that we wish to see firmly established in our own region.
 Peace and fraternity are Latin America's vocation.
 We have been striving to bring the sister Republic of Cuba fully into the inter-American and international fold by means of a policy of outstretched hands, of dialogue and of rapprochement.
 Here too the stasis of confrontation must give way to the dynamics of dialogue, putting to rest this remnant of the cold war.
 Given a set of entirely different characteristics, we are equally interested in promoting a lasting solution to the Haitian crisis, the return to office of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and national reconciliation.
 The diplomatic efforts of the international community, which we firmly support, must have as their point of reference the prompt removal of the de facto authorities by peaceful means - the only means to avoid even greater suffering for the Haitian people.
 Once the legitimate Government is re-established, it will be the responsibility of the international community to provide Haiti with assistance in the daunting task of national reconstruction.
 We are still far from universal peace.
 Rwanda and Bosnia and Herzegovina are emblematic tragedies of our times.
 The scenes of horror shown by the media attest to the difficulty of finding effective solutions to the imbalances which challenge all peoples.
 Critical situations continue to challenge the international community's ability to ensure peace and harmony.
 We welcome the progress achieved in Mozambique.
 President Joaquim Chissano has played a central role in this process.
 In the case of East Timor, we have also noted positive signals in the negotiating process promoted by the Secretary-General, to whom we pay a tribute.
 We are experiencing an ethical revolution.
 The concern with human rights gains universality alongside a growing awareness of the imperative of public probity.
 In the economic and commercial sphere, recent developments are also positive.
 After eight years of difficult negotiations within the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), we adopted the Marrakesh agreements.
 Unilateralism and protectionism, derived from parochial interests, will lose any semblance of legitimacy.
 The effective progress achieved cannot obscure the fact that there are challenges that continue to demand firm resolve from the international community.
 The fundamental rights of individuals, despite having been incorporated into the realm of universally recognized values, still demand the firm and decided support of all those who believe in them.
 In the last 20 years, the gap has widened between rich and poor nations, between the millions of people who are adequately fed and educated and have a surplus for leisure and the billions who are struggling for survival.
 The pressures for migration toward the developed North and the many conflicts of the impoverished South are two sides of the same coin.
 Lingering protectionism, now draped in new colours, resists the assault of economic rationality.
 The positive impact of the Marrakesh agreements is under substantial threat from new conditionalities that will have a restrictive effect on the flows of international trade.
 The mastery of technology is a major watershed between industrialized and developing countries.
 The difficulties in access to advanced technologies are an obstacle to overcoming the disadvantages of developing countries, reducing their competitiveness and creating barriers to the transformation of productive processes.
 The new international division of labour cannot re-enact past formulas that have proved to be inefficient.
 The competitive integration of developing countries into the world economy must build upon dynamic comparative advantages, not static ones, with an increasing integration of knowledge into the productive process.
 Alongside the indispensable internal efforts of each country, such a qualitative leap requires an international environment based on cooperation.
 In order to consolidate peace and ensure that the progress already achieved shall be irreversible, we must be able to develop a vision for our future, an attainable and forward-looking Utopia.
 Brazil is convinced that a truly new order must be based on a pluralistic and democratic perspective on international relations.
 We do not contend unrealistically that States and other international players will refrain from affirming their specific and often conflicting interests.
 The fact is that we all stand to gain, and our interests will be better served, once the basic aspirations of the great majority have been reasonably satisfied.
 Interdependence must be understood in an integrated way, and not merely as the expression of a market-economy phenomenon.
 It presupposes the political ability to act in coordination with others toward the fulfilment of objectives shared by all mankind.
 In an interdependent world the improvement of living conditions in a poor country may have an impact on the creation of jobs in a developed nation.
 The integration of those that are excluded and the promotion of participation by all in world affairs is not only a moral obligation, but, first and foremost, a demonstration of lucid judgement.
 The fundamental commitment to development is the cornerstone of the order to which Brazil aspires.
 Development reinforces freedom, invests the dignity of man with a concrete dimension, stresses efficiency, promotes stability and enhances democracy.
 We must formulate a concept of development that recognizes each country as the main actor in creating its own prosperity, while incorporating the various features of its international dimension in the fields of trade, investment and flows of technology.
 A renewed international effort in favour of development will be successful only under an active and mutually advantageous partnership between the countries of the North and those of the South.
 Advancement of the interests of the richer nations requires their involvement in efforts to overcome the backwardness of the less prosperous.
 To hold the opposite view would be tantamount to believing that a fire in our neighbour's house cannot reach over the fence into our own.
 We must undertake a profound reformulation of the United Nations performance in promoting development.
 Peace and development constitute an indivisible whole and must support each other.
 This great forum cannot be kept outside decisions on matters arising from objectives inscribed in its very Charter.
 Several United Nations Conferences, some having already taken place, others yet to come, are significantly contributing to shedding light upon the need for a comprehensive and coordinated consideration of the development issue.
 Awareness of the fact that the decisions reached at these encounters will produce effective results only if all these issues are examined in an integrated fashion is becoming increasingly firm and universal.
 With a view to fostering a debate on all such issues in a wider conceptual framework, the Brazilian Government proposes the convening of a United Nations conference on development, possibly in 1996, which would seek to synthesize the initiatives and programmes designed to promote human dignity and well-being.
 Democracy should be the rule for political relations within and among States.
 To bring democracy into politics and international relations is a goal which can be turned into reality.
 "in accordance with their legal tradition and their contribution to the cause of peace, the Latin American and Caribbean region must be included in any expansion of the Security Council".
 We have clearly stated our readiness to assume all responsibilities required of countries eligible to occupy permanent seats.
 Elected to the Security Council for the current period, Brazil has lived up to its responsibilities.
 As part of Latin America, we are proud of sharing its long history of peace.
 Cuba's adherence to the Treaty, announced in a letter from President Fidel Castro to President Itamar Franco - in response to a Brazilian initiative - has brought this process to a conclusion.
 Latin America has been a factor of international stability in a turbulent world.
 As pioneers in the promotion of disarmament, we feel entitled to seek equivalent gestures from the entire international community, and in particular from the nuclear-weapon States.
 In this context, we attribute special significance to the prompt adoption, through multilaterally negotiated commitments, of effective measures to reduce, and not merely control, their arsenals, including sensitive nuclear material such as plutonium.
 It is likewise imperative that negotiations on a comprehensive test-ban treaty be successfully concluded, leading to signature.
 Brazil is ready to join in the construction of a new international agenda based on universal participation and cooperation for peace and development.
 This readiness derives from our own identity.
 We are a pluralist and open society, having emerged from the meeting of different cultures and ways of life, which in turn produced a new culture and way of life, founded on tolerance and understanding.
 We enjoy peacefully defined borders with 10 neighbouring countries, and an absence of conflicts for more than 120 years.
 Nearly 100 million voters will cast their ballots, in an atmosphere of absolute freedom, to choose their representatives in the executive and legislative branches at the State and federal levels from as many as 35,000 candidates.
 Ours is one of the most diversified economies in the southern hemisphere.
 As we head toward economic stability, with a strong currency, conditions become favourable for the resumption of a sustained process of economic growth which will undoubtedly place Brazil once again among the most dynamic economies in the world.
 We have made important advances in increasing the exposure of our economy to world trade.
 As of next January, we will have brought into force a common external tariff, along with Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay, and will have consolidated a Customs Union capable of generating growth and prosperity, one of the first customs unions among developing countries.
 These accomplishments represent a telling example of the enterprising capacity of Latin American nations, and constitute a fundamental step toward a harmonious and integrated South America.
 Our efforts in developing political and economic cooperation go well beyond Latin America.
 Such actions range from the intensification of traditional relations within our hemisphere and with industrialized countries to new and creative formulas for cooperating with countries in Africa, Asia and the Middle East.
 In all cases, we have tried to raise the dialogue to increasingly higher levels and, in many instances, have succeeded in establishing dynamic and privileged relationships.
 The ties between Brazil and African nations have been strengthened through the action taken to give structure to the community of Portuguese-speaking countries.
 This new and important forum will unite our brothers and sisters on different continents and lead to even greater understanding and cooperation.
 The zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic will transform this area into a zone free of nuclear weapons, constituting an example of solidarity and brotherhood between two continents.
 With this objective in mind, the 24 countries that make up this forum have just met in Brasilia, with very encouraging results for friendship between Africa and South America.
 Brazil desires for itself what it desires for each and every other nation.
 We know that there can be no happiness and prosperity in the midst of strife and misfortune.
 President Clinton: Let me first congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election as President of the General Assembly for its forty-ninth session.
 We meet today at a time of great hope and change.
 The end of the cold war, the explosion of technology and trade and enterprise have given people the world over new opportunities to live up to their dreams and their God-given potential.
 It is a struggle between freedom and tyranny; between tolerance and bigotry; between knowledge and ignorance; between openness and isolation.
 It is a fight between those who would build free societies governed by laws and those who would impose their will by force.
 But the victors of the First World War squandered their triumph when they turned inward, bringing on a global depression, and allowing fascism to rise and reignite global war.
 In the face of a new totalitarian threat and the nuclear menace, great nations did not walk away from the challenge of the moment.
 Instead they chose to reach out, to rebuild and to lead.
 We must secure the peace.
 It falls to us to avoid the complacency that followed the First World War - without the spur of the imminent threat to our security that followed the Second World War.
 We must ensure that those who fought and found the courage to end the cold war - those from both East and West who loved freedom - did not labour in vain.
 Our sacred mission is to build a new world for our children - more democratic, more prosperous, more free of ancient hatreds and modern means of destruction.
 After all, the walls that once divided nations in this very Hall have come down.
 More have chosen free markets and economic justice.
 More have embraced the values of tolerance and liberty and civil society that allow us all to make the most of our lives.
 Terrible examples of chaos, repression and tyranny also mark our times.
 The twentieth century has proved that the forces of freedom and democracy can endure against great odds; our job is to see that in the twenty-first century these forces triumph.
 These are the dangers we face today.
 We must address these threats to our future.
 Thankfully, the end of the cold war gives us a chance to address them together.
 Each nation will bring to our common task its own particular strengths - economic, political or military.
 Of course, the first duty of every Member of the United Nations is to its own citizens, to their security, their welfare and their interests.
 We will use diplomacy when we can, but force if we must.
 The United States recognizes that we also have a special responsibility in these common endeavours that we are undertaking, the responsibility that goes along with great power and also with our long history of democracy and freedom.
 But we seek to fulfil that responsibility in cooperation with other nations.
 Working together increases the impact and the legitimacy of each of our actions, and sharing the burdens lessens everyone's load.
 In every corner of the globe, from South Africa to Asia, to Central and Eastern Europe, to the Middle East and Latin America, and now to a small island in the Caribbean, ordinary citizens are striving to build their own future.
 Promoting their cause is our generation's great opportunity, and we must do it together.
 Democracies, after all, are more likely to be stable, less likely to wage war; they strengthen civil society and can provide people with the economic and political opportunities to build their futures in their own homes - not to flee their borders.
 In my nation, as in all of your nations, there are many people who are understandably reluctant to undertake these efforts because often the distances are great or the cultures are different.
 There are good reasons for the caution that people feel.
 And, of course, in every common endeavour there is always the potential for failure and often the risk of loss of life.
 And yet our people - as we have seen in the remarkable global response to the terrible crisis in Rwanda - genuinely want to help their neighbours around the world and to make some effort in our common cause.
 The problem is deciding when we must respond and how we shall overcome our reluctance.
 This will never be easy.
 There are no simple formulas.
 All of us will make these decisions in part based on the distance of the problem from our shores, the interests of our nation, the difference we think we can make, the costs required, or the threat to our own citizens in the endeavour.
 History is on our side.
 But in each instance the United States and other nations were privileged to help in these causes.
 This is a partnership that is rooted in democracy, a partnership that is working, a partnership of, not complete agreement, but genuine mutual respect.
 After so many years of nuclear terror, our two nations are taking dramatic steps to ease tensions around the world.
 The Baltic nations are free.
 Russian and American missiles no longer target each other's people.
 And we are working on agreements to halt production of fissile materials for nuclear explosives; to make dismantling of nuclear warheads transparent and irreversible; and further to reduce our nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles.
 The United States and Russia also recognize that we must cooperate to control the emerging danger of terrorists who traffic in nuclear materials.
 To secure nuclear materials at their sources, we have agreed with Russia to stop plutonium production by the year 2000; to construct a storage facility for fissile materials and buy up stocks of weapons-grade fuel; and to combat the criminals who are trying to smuggle materials for nuclear explosives.
 Our two nations and Germany have increased cooperation and engaged in joint anti-terrorist training.
 Soon, under the leadership of our Federal Bureau of Investigation, we will open a law enforcement training academy in Europe, where police will learn how to combat more effectively trafficking of nuclear weapons components, as well as the drug trade, organized crime and money laundering.
 The United States will also advance a wide-ranging non-proliferation agenda: a global convention to halt production of fissile materials; efforts to curb North Korea's nuclear ambitions; transparent procedures for dismantling nuclear warheads; and our work to ban testing and to extend the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
 And today I am proposing a first step toward the eventual elimination of a less visible but still deadly threat: the world's 85 million anti-personnel land-mines - one for every 50 persons on the face of the earth.
 I ask all nations concerned to join with us and conclude an agreement to reduce the number and availability of those mines.
 Ridding the world of those often hidden weapons will help to save the lives of tens of thousands of men, women and innocent children in the years to come.
 Our progress in the last year also provides confidence that in the post-cold-war years we can adapt and construct global institutions that will help to provide security and increase economic growth throughout the world.
 Since I spoke here last year, 22 nations have joined the Partnership for Peace of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
 In Asia, security talks and economic cooperation will lead to further stability.
 It is time that we think anew about the structures of this global economy as well, tearing down walls that separate nations instead of hiding behind them.
 At the Group of Seven meeting at Naples this year we committed ourselves to this task of renewal, to re-examining the economic institutions that have served us so well in the past.
 Though still in its infancy, the North American Free Trade Agreement has dramatically increased trade between the United States and Mexico and has produced in the United States alone an estimated 200,000 new jobs.
 And this week I will send legislation to the Congress to implement the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the largest trade agreement in all of history.
 GATT - and its successor, the World Trade Organization - holds the promise for all of us of increased exports, higher wages and improved living standards.
 In the months and years to come we will work no less to extend the reach of open markets, starting with the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Council and the Summit of the Americas later this year.
 Here at the United Nations we must develop a concrete plan to meet the challenges of the next 50 years even as we celebrate the last 50 years.
 I believe we should declare next year's fiftieth anniversary not just a year of celebration but a year of renewal.
 Our objectives should include ready, efficient and capable United Nations peace-keeping forces, and I am happy to report that, as I pledged last year and thanks to support in the United States Congress, $1.2 billion is now available from the United States for this critical account.
 We must also pledge to keep United Nations reform moving forward so that we do more with less, and we must improve our ability to respond to urgent needs.
 And let us not lose sight of the special role that development and democracy can play in preventing conflicts once peace has been established.
 Never before has the United Nations been in a better position to achieve the democratic goals of our founders.
 The end of the cold war has freed us from decades of paralysing divisions.
 And we all know that multilateral cooperation is not only necessary to address the new threats we face but possible to succeed.
 The efforts we have undertaken together in Haiti are a prime example.
 Under the sponsorship of the United Nations, American troops, now being joined by the personnel of an ever-growing international coalition of over two dozen nations, are giving the people of Haiti their chance at freedom.
 Creative diplomacy, the influence of economic power and the credible threat of military force - all have contributed to this moment of opportunity.
 Essential civil order will be restored.
 Human rights violations will be curbed.
 The first refugees will be returning within hours, on this day.
 The military leaders will step down.
 The democratic Government will be restored.
 President Aristide will return.
 The multinational mission will turn its responsibilities over to the United Nations mission, which will remain in Haiti throughout 1995, until a new president is elected.
 During this time a multinational development effort will make available more than $1 billion to begin helping the Haitians rebuild their country.
 In the spirit of reconciliation and reconstruction, President Aristide yesterday called for the immediate easing of sanctions so that the work of rebuilding can begin immediately.
 Today I am also announcing that the United States will suspend all unilateral sanctions against Haiti except those that affect the military leaders and their immediate supporters.
 This will include regularly scheduled air flights when the airport becomes available, financial transactions and travel restrictions.
 I urge all other nations to do the same.
 They have to do this for themselves.
 Every new democratic nation is fragile.
 But we will see the day when the people of Haiti fulfil their aspirations to liberty and when they are once again making genuine economic progress.
 United Nations actions in Bosnia, like those in Haiti, demonstrate that progress can be made when a coalition backs up diplomacy with military power.
 For the first time ever, NATO has taken, since we met last year, military actions beyond the territory of its members.
 The threat of NATO air power helped to establish the exclusion zone around Sarajevo and to end the Bosnian Serbs' spring offensive against Gorazde.
 To that extent the situation in Bosnia has improved, but in recent weeks the situation around Sarajevo has deteriorated substantially, and Sarajevo once again faces the prospect of strangulation.
 A new resolve by the United Nations to enforce its resolutions is now necessary to save Sarajevo, and NATO stands ready to act.
 The situation in Bosnia is yet another reminder of the greatest irony of this century we are leaving.
 This century, so full of hope and opportunity and achievement, has also been an age of deep destruction and despair.
 We cannot help but remember the millions who gave their lives during two world wars and the half century of struggle by men and women in the East and West who ultimately prevailed in the name of freedom.
 But we must also think of our children and the world we will leave them in the twenty-first century.
 It also encountered serious limitations - and was, at times, close to paralysis - in the attainment of its ends.
 Its achievements and limitations alike have reflected the world power structure prevailing since 1945, as well as the efforts of its Members: countries that are equal and sovereign but diverse in their beliefs, cultural expressions, geographical endowments and levels of development.
 At that time also, world development depended on financing for recovery and, therefore, on the recycling of resources by the victorious Powers, which were net exporters of capital, in the form, very often, of "international aid".
 Today, without the bipolar balance of power and faced with the intense financial competition and the regional ethnic and religious conflicts of recent years, we recognize that there are other ways in which the United Nations should promote peace, security and development, as set forth in its founding Charter.
 Now, at the end of another war - the cold war - it is time to recognize a new content in the objectives of our world Organization and new conditions for providing deep-rooted, lasting responses to the aspirations for justice and well-being shared by all mankind.
 The major dilemmas of our times therefore stem from profound complexities in the economic and political spheres and in the opportunities open to all peoples to attain a decent standard of living.
 Thus, it is essential to find and apply new solutions to the problems resulting from the end of the bipolar confrontation and from the new economic contests between powerful regions, whose effects sometimes have an even greater impact on nations remote from these centres of finance and trade.
 In building up new hope, we must unquestionably persevere in our efforts to eradicate the nuclear threat and the risks posed by chemical and biological weapons and the arms race.
 Mexico has always taken part in contributing to reducing those dangers.
 My country is pleased at the recent accession by Argentina, Brazil and Chile to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and by the forthcoming accession announced by Cuba, which fulfil the Latin American ideal of inhabiting a nuclear-weapon-free region.
 We should now continue the negotiations on, and put into effect, the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty and the Convention on chemical weapons, signed in January 1993 and thus far ratified by a mere 14 States.
 But this is not sufficient.
 This is the spirit of political dialogue and peace with honour required by the new era; this is the path of new hope.
 Mexico welcomes the progress made in negotiations leading to lasting peace in various parts of the world, especially in the Middle East.
 Mexico will continue its enthusiastic and unwavering support for the peace processes in Central America and congratulates the parties involved, which are making progress along the path of dialogue and negotiation.
 It also reiterates the need to give preference to peaceful and diplomatic means above all others, as well as to foster specific forms of cooperation to ensure better living standards for the Haitian people, for without them democratic institutions will be weak and short-lived.
 What are needed instead are economic exchanges, political dialogue and a common willingness to recognize and respect one another, unconditionally and without exception.
 Recognition of plurality, respect for sovereignty and the reaching of consensual accords are also bases on which the United Nations can construct new forms of cooperation and technical assistance aimed at consolidating democracy and at achieving the effective protection of human rights.
 As a form of political organization of peoples, democracy is certainly the best way to facilitate development with justice; it is also the system which best guarantees respect for human rights.
 Hunger and unemployment, drug-trafficking and the depletion of natural resources, forced migrations and new forms of trade protectionism impair development and the full exercise of human rights and hinder the democratic participation of individuals in shaping their own destinies.
 Therefore, coordinated action by nations to deal with these grave problems of our times can help to broaden political participation and ensure better conditions to improve well-being and provide for the protection of human rights.
 Reconsidering the question of the defence of human rights and the strengthening of democracy also involves reconsidering the issue of development on the basis of fair access to markets, capital and new technologies.
 It is not by chance that democratic stability flourishes where there is economic stability and growth; nor is it by chance that more human rights violations occur where the population is prey to poverty, illiteracy and disease.
 In the economic sphere, we are facing both the challenges and the opportunities posed by interdependence and globalization.
 We are well aware that the development of the most industrialized nations may prove to be insufficient without sustained growth in the developing countries.
 We know, too, that aid may prove to be ineffective and insufficient, when the basic need is to move toward equality of opportunities worldwide by opening markets to the products of developing countries.
 In the past few years the world has undergone a transition toward a liberalization of trade that is unprecedented in modern history.
 This new liberalization is also a reason for us to feel optimistic that freer trade will contribute to the eradication of poverty.
 More trade will translate into more and better jobs.
 To that end, we must consolidate the present opening of markets to competition.
 As progress is made in trade agreements and treaties, it is imperative to recognize the asymmetries between nations and to avoid conditioning trade on such matters as labour and environmental issues, which, although legitimate aspects of trade, can be used artificially to conceal new forms of protectionism.
 If we fail to pay it, it will be utopian to think of progress in democracy or any widespread and enduring peace and security.
 To settle that debt, the United Nations must grant clear priority to development and cooperation within a framework of multilateral action, rather than giving priority to actions backed by arms to maintain security.
 We have before us the opportunity to reorder our priorities as we deal at this forty-ninth session of the General Assembly with the topic of a new Agenda for Development, and thereby to move toward lasting peace based on comprehensive, balanced worldwide development.
 Fully achieving development also presupposes the sustainable use of natural resources and the maintenance of the fragile balance of ecosystems that are frequently overexploited, resulting in the impoverishment of those living under such systems.
 Here, the Agenda drawn up by the United Nations at the historic summit in Rio de Janeiro continues to be more an aspiration than a reality.
 Only on the basis of recognizing and respecting pluralism will we be able to implant new and better world mechanisms for coordinating economic matters to achieve a better distribution of capital, technology and joint forms of production.
 Only on the basis of this awareness and of renewed solidarity will we be able to sustain action aimed at achieving effective justice in social matters.
 With this approach to the future, we will be able to address existing imbalances by taking shared responsibility for just and civilized coexistence.
 In brief, it is a question of adopting and recognizing pluralism as an expression of freedom, and justice as an essential prerequisite for security in the coexistence of nations.
 In Mexico, this approach is called social liberalism.
 A product of our history and of our shared universal aspiration to justice, social liberalism has led us to undertake far-reaching democratic reform, changes in our economic structures, a frontal attack on poverty, and a new linkage between Mexico and the world.
 We are forging a reformed State that depends not on its size but on its effectiveness in achieving, with freedom, conditions of greater justice.
 In 1990 I spoke to this Assembly about the objectives of Mexican change.
 Today we have results that strengthen our hopes and give us a better understanding of world challenges.
 They were the elections most closely monitored by political parties, national observers and international visitors in our history.
 The Mexican people opted for legality and peace.
 The new world balance calls for new mentalities and new priorities: a reordering of international realities in accordance with rules agreed upon on the basis of respect for the sovereignty of each nation and recognition of the pluralities of peoples.
 Fundamentally, our times call for the uniting of all our efforts, in democracy and freedom, to reduce poverty in the world.
 Otherwise there can be no possibility of peace and no lasting security.
 These new imperatives express not only enormous needs but also the aspiration for the equality of nations in the building of a future that will hold promise only if it belongs to all of us.
 That is the meaning of "international community" as embodied in the Charter of San Francisco: a future that no one has the right to deny to future generations.
 Today, as then, peace can be preserved only through the observance of law; today, more than in the past, security requires the greatest development of every nation, every country, so that together we can make a reality of the hope for a common future.
 The President (interpretation from French): The Assembly will now hear an address by the President of the Republic of Ce d'Ivoire.
 President B\x{5dae}i (interpretation from French): Each year's session of the General Assembly provides us with an opportunity to take a panoramic view of the world's great questions and to reflect on the prospects for its future.
 This experience is all the more stirring for me since I am returning to this lofty site of modern history where I participated in numerous sessions when I was my country's young Ambassador in Washington to the great American nation.
 My vivid memory of those years is of having all alone represented my country on the day of its admission to the community of sovereign nations through the Security Council.
 That was 34 years ago.
 I am equally proud that you, Mr. President, a worthy son of Ce d'Ivoire and of Africa, are presiding over this forty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
 My pride is shared by the entire people of Ce d'Ivoire, on behalf of which I extend warm congratulations on your noteworthy election to this prestigious post.
 This election attests to the confidence and esteem which you enjoy in this forum thanks to your qualities as an experienced diplomat and to your great knowledge, acquired over more than two decades, of international relations, in particular in Geneva and New York.
 It also expresses recognition of the balanced pragmatism with which, for 34 years now, Ce d'Ivoire has been conducting its foreign policy.
 I am therefore convinced that you conduct the work of this session with competence and skill.
 Mr. President, allow me to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Samuel Insanally, for the outstanding work he accomplished throughout his mandate, as well as all the members of his General Committee.
 Finally, on behalf of my delegation and in my personal capacity, I should like to pay a well-deserved tribute to Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretary-General of our Organization, for his courageous action and his tireless efforts for peace and for understanding among peoples.
 We should like to assure him once again of our full confidence and of our total support in his quest for peaceful solutions to the problems the world is experiencing.
 The tribute to his memory in this very Hall, on 9 December last, and the moving expressions of sympathy on the day of his funeral, 7 February 1994, will remain forever enshrined in the collective memory of the citizens of Ce d'Ivoire.
 I am gratified to take this opportunity solemnly to assure the international community of my determination to pursue the policy of openness and the search for peace begun by my illustrious predecessor.
 The end of the Cold War had given rise to hope for fruitful relationships based on peace and on shared economic and social development.
 Now there is general astonishment at the fact that the world, which the United Nations is destined to serve, has entered a stage of uncertainty.
 No one imagined that the fall of the Berlin Wall, whose symbolism marked the beginning of those great changes that we have been witnessing since 1989, would expose such serious defects, which today are making their appearance in the most untenable forms in human relations.
 In fact, we are ashamed at the idea of being witness to political, ethnic and religious tensions and armed conflicts that we believed belonged to a bygone age.
 The painful examples of the former Yugoslavia, of Angola, Burundi, Liberia, Rwanda and Somalia show us the intensity of the tragedies that we are experiencing.
 As concerns Liberia, the implementation of the Cotonou Agreement of 25 July 1993 is encountering difficulties on the ground.
 Indeed, aside from the difficulties which occurred in the establishment of institutions and the formation of the transitional Government, this Agreement has come up against the sensitive issue of the disarmament of the factions.
 That disarmament was the precondition for the elections originally planned for 7 September 1994.
 Unfortunately, out of a force assessed at approximately 60,000 troops, only 3,000 soldiers of the United Liberation Movement for Democracy (ULIMO) and the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) have laid down their arms since the first days of the disarmament operations.
 We hope that the agreement just concluded in Ghana on 12 September 1994 will experience a better fate, leading to general elections and to the exercise of democracy in Liberia.
 It is well known that Ce d'Ivoire has made great efforts for years now to find a peaceful solution to this conflict, which has repercussions of all kinds in the subregion, especially in my country.
 As to the tragedy in Rwanda, despite the burden of the Liberian conflict on our economy, we are ready to participate, as long as we receive the necessary logistical support, in the efforts of the international community to restore peace in that ravaged country.
 Here we should like to hail the courageous initiative undertaken by France to render humanitarian assistance to all those who have fallen victim to this tragedy.
 Other actions, particularly those undertaken by our Organization and other Member States within the framework of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) also deserve our encouragement.
 Concerning all hotbeds of tension, be they on the African continent or elsewhere in the world, we launch the same appeal for peace, tolerance and understanding.
 These social and political difficulties that have arisen in a number of States are caused for the most part by misery, extreme poverty, hunger, fear, injustice, exclusion, ignorance and intolerance.
 Every man and woman should not only eschew tribal, religious, political and ideological hatreds, but should also contribute individually and collectively to the campaign against hunger, disease, ignorance and in favour of the implementation of the ideal of shared welfare.
 As I did in Tunis during the thirtieth Summit of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate to President Nelson Mandela our sincere congratulations on his outstanding and historic election to the presidency of a democratic and multi-racial South Africa.
 May I here hail the Israeli and Palestinian builders of this process, as well as all those who encouraged this event, which was welcomed unanimously.
 We also extend our best wishes for the success of this great and noble enterprise and we hope that this highly sensitive region of the Middle East will enjoy a just and lasting peace.
 Now more than ever, the world needs peace to release the energies mankind needs to flourish.
 That is why democracy, perceived as one of the ways to guarantee freedom, promote private initiative and the participation of all citizens in development, is something I particularly cherish.
 Hence, discussions begun several years ago on the restructuring of some of its bodies, in particular the Security Council, seem to us timely in providing broader representation for Member States without, however, damaging its effectiveness.
 Moreover, in October 1995, the international community will commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of our Organization.
 It will also be the time to recall that the founding fathers had risen up against the injustice of unequal development.
 While the former continue to enjoy continually rising standards of living and welfare, the latter, on the contrary, are now experiencing a more serious deterioration of their economies - if not generalized impoverishment.
 The growth rates noted in some of these countries cannot conceal or substantively reverse this deplorable trend.
 Nearly all these countries' economic parameters and indicators are today negative despite all the bold recovery and economic restructuring measures that have been undertaken.
 That is why we call for ever closer solidarity between North and South, by which I mean a real partnership taking into account their genuine interests in an international economy of sharing.
 Did not the international community very early on grasp this need for complementarity and solidarity by advocating as long ago as 1974 a new, more just and equitable international economic order?
 Faced with geopolitical upheavals and new formations of economic blocs, and given the severe trials which have struck them specifically, the African States demonstrated their joint will to integration by signing the Treaty creating the African Economic Community on 3 June 1991 in Abuja.
 The Treaty entered into force on 3 June 1994, and this demonstrates our determination to cope with these problems.